# IDisposable, Dispose, and Close
.NET defines a special interface for types requiring a tear-down method:
```c#
public interface IDisposable
{
  void Dispose();
}
```
C#’s using statement provides a syntactic shortcut for calling Dispose on objects that implement IDisposable, using a try/finally block:
```c#
using (FileStream fs = new FileStream ("myFile.txt", FileMode.Open))
{
  // ... Write to the file ...
}
```
The compiler converts this to the following:
```c#
FileStream fs = new FileStream ("myFile.txt", FileMode.Open);
try
{
  // ... Write to the file ...
}
finally
{
  if (fs != null) ((IDisposable)fs).Dispose();
}
```
The finally block ensures that the Dispose method is called even when an exception is thrown or the code exits the block early.

Similarly, the following syntax ensures disposal as soon as fs goes out of scope:

using FileStream fs = new FileStream ("myFile.txt", FileMode.Open);

// ... Write to the file ...
In simple scenarios, writing your own disposable type is just a matter of implementing IDisposable and writing the Dispose method:
```c#
sealed class Demo : IDisposable
{
  public void Dispose()
  {
    // Perform cleanup / tear-down.
    ...
  }
}
```
`NOTE`
This pattern works well in simple cases and is appropriate for sealed classes. In “Calling Dispose from a Finalizer”, we describe a more elaborate pattern that can provide a backup for consumers that forget to call Dispose. With unsealed types, there’s a strong case for following this latter pattern from the outset—otherwise, it becomes very messy if the subtype wants to add such functionality itself.

# Standard Disposal Semantics
.NET follows a de facto set of rules in its disposal logic. These rules are not hardwired to .NET or the C# language in any way; their purpose is to define a consistent protocol to consumers. Here they are:
  - After an object has been disposed, it’s beyond redemption. It cannot be reactivated, and calling its methods or properties (other than Dispose) throws an ObjectDisposedException.
  - Calling an object’s Dispose method repeatedly causes no error.
  - If disposable object x “owns” disposable object y, x’s Dispose method automatically calls y’s Dispose method—unless instructed otherwise.

These rules are also helpful when writing your own types, though they’re not mandatory. Nothing prevents you from writing an “Undispose” method other than, perhaps, the flak you might cop from colleagues!

According to rule 3, a container object automatically disposes its child objects. A good example is a Windows Forms container control such as a Form or Panel. The container can host many child controls, yet you don’t dispose every one of them explicitly; closing or disposing the parent control or form takes care of the whole lot. Another example is when you wrap a FileStream in a DeflateStream. `Disposing the DeflateStream also disposes the FileStream—unless you instructed otherwise in the constructor.`

# Close and Stop
Some types define a method called Close in addition to Dispose. The .NET BCL is not completely consistent on the semantics of a Close method, although in nearly all cases it’s either of the following:

  - Functionally identical to Dispose
  - A functional subset of Dispose

An example of the latter is IDbConnection: a Closed connection can be re-Opened; a Disposed connection cannot. Another example is a Windows Form activated with ShowDialog: Close hides it; Dispose releases its resources.

Some classes define a Stop method (e.g., Timer or HttpListener). A Stop method may release unmanaged resources, like Dispose, but unlike Dispose, it allows for re-Starting.


# When to Dispose
A safe rule to follow (in nearly all cases) is “if in doubt, dispose.” Objects wrapping an unmanaged resource handle will nearly always require disposal in order to free the handle. `Examples include file or network streams, network sockets, Windows Forms controls, GDI+ pens, brushes, and bitmaps.` Conversely, if a type is disposable, it will often (but not always) reference an unmanaged handle, directly or indirectly. This is because unmanaged handles provide the gateway to the “outside world” of `OS resources, network connections, and database locks`—the primary means by which objects can create trouble outside of themselves if improperly abandoned.
There are, however, three scenarios for not disposing:

  - When you don’t “own” the object—for example, when obtaining a shared object via a static field or property
  - When an object’s Dispose method does something that you don’t want
  - When an object’s Dispose method is unnecessary by design, and disposing that object would add complexity to your program

The first category is rare. The main cases are in the System.Drawing namespace: the GDI+ objects obtained through static fields or properties (such as Brushes.Blue) must never be disposed because the same instance is used throughout the life of the application. Instances that you obtain through constructors, however (such as new SolidBrush), should be disposed, as should instances obtained through static methods (such as Font.FromHdc).

The second category is more common. There are some good examples in the System.IO and System.Data namespaces:

Type	Disposal function	When not to dispose
`MemoryStream`	Prevents further I/O	When you later need to read/write the stream
`StreamReader`, `StreamWriter`	Flushes the reader/writer and closes the underlying stream	When you want to keep the underlying stream open (you must then call Flush on a StreamWriter when you’re done)
`IDbConnection`	Releases a database connection and clears the connection string	If you need to re-Open it, you should call Close instead of Dispose
`DbContext` (EF Core)	Prevents further use	When you might have lazily evaluated queries connected to that context


`MemoryStream’s Dispose` method disables only the object; it doesn’t perform any critical cleanup because a MemoryStream holds no unmanaged handles or other such resources.

The third category includes the classes such as `StringReader and StringWriter`. These types are disposable under the duress of their base class rather than through a genuine need to perform essential cleanup. If you happen to instantiate and work with such an object entirely in one method, wrapping it in a using block adds little inconvenience. But if the object is longer lasting, keeping track of when it’s no longer used so that you can dispose of it adds unnecessary complexity. In such cases, you can simply ignore object disposal.

# Clearing Fields in Disposal
In general, you don’t need to clear an object’s fields in its Dispose method. However, it is good practice to unsubscribe from events that the object has subscribed to internally over its lifetime (for an example, see “Managed Memory Leaks”). Unsubscribing from such events prevents receiving unwanted event notifications—and prevents unintentionally keeping the object alive in the eyes of the garbage collector (GC).

`NOTE`
A Dispose method itself does not cause (managed) memory to be released—this can happen only in garbage collection.

It’s also worth setting a field to indicate that the object is disposed so that you can throw an ObjectDisposedException if a consumer later tries to call members on the object. A good pattern is to use a publicly readable automatic property for this:

public bool IsDisposed { get; private set; }
Although technically unnecessary, it can also be good to clear an object’s own event handlers (by setting them to null) in the Dispose method. This eliminates the possibility of those events firing during or after disposal.

Occasionally, `an object holds high-value secrets, such as encryption key`s. In these cases, it `can make sense to clear such data from fields during disposal (to avoid potential discovery by other processes on the machine when the memory is later released to the operating system). The SymmetricAlgorithm class in System​.Secu⁠rity`.Cryptography does exactly this by calling Array.Clear on the byte array holding the encryption key.

# 
}
Such an API is clumsy to use. Consumers must remember to call ResumeEvents. And to be robust, they must do so in a finally block (in case an exception is thrown):

var foo = new Foo();
foo.SuspendEvents();
try
{
  ... do stuff ...      // Because an exception could be thrown here
}
finally
{
  foo.ResumeEvents();   // ...we must call this in a finally block
}
A better pattern is to do away with ResumeEvents and have SuspendEvents return an IDisposable. Consumers can then do this:

using (foo.SuspendEvents())
{
  ... do stuff ...
}
The problem is that this pushes work onto whoever has to implement the Suspend​Events method. Even with a good effort to reduce whitespace, we end up with this extra clutter:

public IDisposable SuspendEvents()
{
  _suspendCount++;
  return new SuspendToken (this);
}

class SuspendToken : IDisposable 
{
  Foo _foo;          
  public SuspendToken (Foo foo) => _foo = foo;
  public void Dispose()
  {
    if (_foo != null) _foo._suspendCount--;
    _foo = null;  // Prevent against consumer disposing twice
  }
}
The anonymous disposal pattern solves this problem. With the following reusable class:

public class Disposable : IDisposable
{
  public static Disposable Create (Action onDispose)
    => new Disposable (onDispose);

  Action _onDispose;
  Disposable (Action onDispose) => _onDispose = onDispose;

  public void Dispose()
  {
    _onDispose?.Invoke();   // Execute disposal action if non-null.
    _onDispose = null;      // Ensure it can’t execute a second time.
  }
}
we can reduce our SuspendEvents method to the following:

public IDisposable SuspendEvents()
{
  _suspendCount++;
  return Disposable.Create (() => _suspendCount--);
}  