# StackTrace and StackFrame
The `StackTrace and StackFrame classes provide a read-only view of an execution call stack.` You can obtain stack traces for the current thread or an Exception object. Such information is useful mostly for diagnostic purposes, though you also can use it in programming (hacks). `StackTrace represents a complete call stack; StackFrame represents a single method call within that stack.`
If you instantiate a StackTrace object with no arguments—or with a bool argu‐ ment—you get a snapshot of the current thread’s call stack. The bool argument, if true, instructs StackTrace to read the assembly .pdb (project debug) files if they are present, giving you access to filename, line number, and column offset data. Project debug files are generated when you compile with the /debug switch. (Visual Studio compiles with this switch unless you request otherwise via Advanced Build Settings.)
After you’ve obtained a StackTrace, you can examine a particular frame by calling GetFrame—or obtain the whole lot by using GetFrames:
    static void Main() { A (); }
    static void A()    { B (); }
    static void B()    { C (); }
    static void C()
    {
      StackTrace s = new StackTrace (true);
      Console.WriteLine ("Total frames:   " + s.FrameCount);
      Console.WriteLine ("Current method: " + s.GetFrame(0).GetMethod().Name);
      Console.WriteLine ("Calling method: " + s.GetFrame(1).GetMethod().Name);
      Console.WriteLine ("Entry method:   " + s.GetFrame
                                           (s.FrameCount-1).GetMethod().Name);

                                           Console.WriteLine ("Call Stack:");
foreach (StackFrame f in s.GetFrames())
  Console.WriteLine (
"  File: "
"  Line: "
"  Col: "
"  Offset: " + f.GetILOffset() +
"  Method: " + f.GetMethod().Name);
+ f.GetFileName() +
+ f.GetFileLineNumber() + + f.GetFileColumnNumber() +
}
Here’s the output:
    Total frames:   4
    Current method: C
    Calling method: B
    Entry method: Main
    Call stack:
      File: C:\Test\Program.cs  Line: 15  Col: 4  Offset: 7  Method: C
      File: C:\Test\Program.cs  Line: 12  Col: 22  Offset: 6  Method: B
      File: C:\Test\Program.cs  Line: 11  Col: 22  Offset: 6  Method: A
      File: C:\Test\Program.cs  Line: 10  Col: 25  Offset: 6  Method: Main

      The Intermediate Language (IL) offset indicates the offset of the instruction that will execute next—not the instruction that’s currently executing. Peculiarly, though, the line and col‐ umn number (if a .pdb file is present) usually indicate the actual execution point.
This happens because the CLR does its best to infer the actual execution point when calculating the line and column from the IL offset. The compiler emits IL in such a way as to make this possible—including inserting nop (no-operation) instruc‐ tions into the IL stream.
Compiling with optimizations enabled, however, disables the insertion of nop instructions, and so the stack trace might show the line and column number of the next statement to execute. Obtaining a useful stack trace is further hampered by the fact that optimization can pull other tricks, including collapsing entire methods.
A shortcut to obtaining the essential information for an entire StackTrace is to call ToString on it. Here’s what the result looks like:
       at DebugTest.Program.C() in C:\Test\Program.cs:line 16
       at DebugTest.Program.B() in C:\Test\Program.cs:line 12
       at DebugTest.Program.A() in C:\Test\Program.cs:line 11
       at DebugTest.Program.Main() in C:\Test\Program.cs:line 10
Exception already has a StackTrace property; however, this property returns a simple string—not a StackTrace object. A StackTrace object is far more useful in logging exceptions that occur after deployment—where no .pdb files are available —because you can log the IL offset in lieu of line and column numbers. With an IL offset and ildasm, you can pinpoint where within a method an error occurred.