# Do We Really Need Locks and Barriers?
Working with shared writable fields without locks or fences is asking for trouble. There’s a lot of misleading information on this topic — including the MSDN documentation which states that MemoryBarrier is required only on multiprocessor systems with weak memory ordering, such as a system employing multiple Itanium processors. We can demonstrate that memory barriers are important on ordinary Intel Core-2 and Pentium processors with the following short program. You’ll need to run it with optimizations enabled and without a debugger (in Visual Studio, select Release Mode in the solution’s configuration manager, and then start without debugging):
```c#
static void Main()
{
  bool complete = false; 
  var t = new Thread (() =>
  {
    bool toggle = false;
    while (!complete) toggle = !toggle;
  });
  t.Start();
  Thread.Sleep (1000);
  complete = true;
  t.Join();        // Blocks indefinitely
}
```
This program never terminates because the complete variable is cached in a CPU register. Inserting a call to Thread.MemoryBarrier inside the while loop (or locking around reading complete) fixes the error.

# The volatile keyword
Another (more advanced) way to solve this problem is to apply the volatile keyword to the _complete field:
```c#
volatile bool _complete;
```
The `volatile` keyword instructs the compiler to generate an `acquire-fence on every read from that field, and a release-fence on every write to that field`. An acquire-fence prevents other reads/writes from being moved before the fence; a release-fence prevents other reads/writes from being moved after the fence. These “half-fences” are faster than full fences because they give the runtime and hardware more scope for optimization.

`Note`: As it happens, Intel’s X86 and X64 processors always apply acquire-fences to reads and release-fences to writes — whether or not you use the volatile keyword — so this keyword has no effect on the hardware if you’re using these processors. However, volatile does have an effect on optimizations performed by the compiler and the CLR — as well as on 64-bit AMD and (to a greater extent) Itanium processors. This means that you cannot be more relaxed by virtue of your clients running a particular type of CPU.

(And even if you do use volatile, you should still maintain a healthy sense of anxiety, as we’ll see shortly!)

# The effect of applying volatile to fields can be summarized as follows:

First instruction 	  Second instruction	    Can they be swapped?
    Read	                  Read	                      No
    Read	                  Write	                      No
    Write	                  Write	                      No (The CLR ensures that write-write operations are never swapped, even without the volatile keyword)
    Write	                  Read	                      Yes!


`Notice` that applying volatile doesn’t prevent a write followed by a read from being swapped, and this can create brainteasers. Joe Duffy illustrates the problem well with the following example: if Test1 and Test2 run simultaneously on different threads, it’s possible for a and b to both end up with a value of 0 (despite the use of volatile on both x and y):
```c#
class IfYouThinkYouUnderstandVolatile
{
  volatile int x, y;
 
  void Test1()        // Executed on one thread
  {
    x = 1;            // Volatile write (release-fence)
    int a = y;        // Volatile read (acquire-fence)
    ...
  }
 
  void Test2()        // Executed on another thread
  {
    y = 1;            // Volatile write (release-fence)
    int b = x;        // Volatile read (acquire-fence)
    ...
  }
}

```
This presents a strong case for avoiding volatile: even if you understand the subtlety in this example, will other developers working on your code also understand it? A full fence between each of the two assignments in Test1 and Test2 (or a lock) solves the problem.

The volatile keyword is not supported with pass-by-reference arguments or captured local variables: in these cases you must use the `VolatileRead` and `VolatileWrite` methods.

# VolatileRead and VolatileWrite
The static VolatileRead and VolatileWrite methods in the Thread class read/write a variable while enforcing (technically, a superset of) the guarantees made by the volatile keyword. Their implementations are relatively inefficient, though, in that they actually generate `full fences`. Here are their complete implementations for the integer type:
```c#
public static void VolatileWrite (ref int address, int value)
{
  MemoryBarrier(); address = value;
}
 
public static int VolatileRead (ref int address)
{
  int num = address; MemoryBarrier(); return num;
}
```
You can see from this that if you call VolatileWrite followed by VolatileRead, no barrier is generated in the middle: this enables the same brainteaser scenario that we saw earlier.


