# Windows Data Protection
In the section “File and Directory Operations” on page 699, we described how you could use File.Encrypt to request that the operating system transparently encrypt a file:
    File.WriteAllText ("myfile.txt", "");
    File.Encrypt ("myfile.txt");
    File.AppendAllText ("myfile.txt", "sensitive data");
The encryption in this case uses a key derived from the logged-in user’s pass‐ word. You can use this same implicitly derived key to encrypt a byte array with the Windows Data Protection API (DPAPI). The DPAPI is exposed through the ProtectedData class—a simple type with two static methods:
public static byte[] Protect
(byte[] userData, byte[] optionalEntropy, DataProtectionScope scope);
public static byte[] Unprotect
(byte[] encryptedData, byte[] optionalEntropy, DataProtectionScope scope);
Whatever you include in optionalEntropy is added to the key, thereby increasing its security. The DataProtectionScope enum argument allows two options: Current User or LocalMachine. With CurrentUser, a key is derived from the logged-in user’s credentials; with LocalMachine, a machine-wide key is used, common to all users. This means that with the CurrentUser scope, data encrypted by one user cannot be decrypted by another. A LocalMachine key provides less protection but works under a Windows Service or a program needing to operate under a variety of accounts.
  852 | Chapter 20: Cryptography
Here’s a simple encryption and decryption demonstration:
    byte[] original = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    DataProtectionScope scope = DataProtectionScope.CurrentUser;
byte[] encrypted = ProtectedData.Protect (original, null, scope); byte[] decrypted = ProtectedData.Unprotect (encrypted, null, scope); // decrypted is now {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
Windows Data Protection provides moderate security against an attacker with full access to the computer, depending on the strength of the user’s password. With LocalMachine scope, it’s effective only against those with restricted physical and electronic access.

# Hashing

A hashing algorithm distills a potentially large number of bytes into a small fixed- length hashcode. Hashing algorithms are designed such that a single-bit change anywhere in the source data results in a significantly different hashcode. This makes it suitable for comparing files or detecting accidental (or malicious) corruption to a file or data stream.
Hashing also acts as one-way encryption, because it’s difficult to impossible to convert a hashcode back into the original data. This makes it ideal for storing passwords in a database, because should your database become compromised, you don’t want the attacker to gain access to plain-text passwords. To authenticate, you simply hash what the user types in and compare it to the hash that’s stored in the database.
To hash, you call ComputeHash on one of the HashAlgorithm subclasses, such as SHA1 or SHA256:
    byte[] hash;
    using (Stream fs = File.OpenRead ("checkme.doc"))
hash = SHA1.Create().ComputeHash (fs); // SHA1 hash is 20 bytes long
The ComputeHash method also accepts a byte array, which is convenient for hashing passwords (we describe a more secure technique in “Hashing Passwords” on page 854):
    byte[] data = System.Text.Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes ("stRhong%pword");
    byte[] hash = SHA256.Create().ComputeHash (data);

The `GetBytes` method on an Encoding object converts a string to a byte array; the GetString method converts it back. An Encoding object cannot, however, convert an encrypted or hashed byte array to a string, because scram‐ bled data usually violates text encoding rules. Instead, use Con vert.ToBase64String and Convert.FromBase64String: these convert between any byte array and a legal (and XML- or JSON-friendly) string.

# Hash Algorithms in .NET
SHA1 and SHA256 are two of the HashAlgorithm subtypes provided by .NET. Here are all the major algorithms, in ascending order of security (and hash length, in bytes):
  `  MD5(16) → SHA1(20) → SHA256(32) → SHA384(48) → SHA512(64)`
MD5 and SHA1 are currently the fastest algorithms, although the other algorithms are not more than (roughly) two times slower in their current implementations. To give a ballpark figure, you can expect a performance of more than 100 MB per second with any of these algorithms on today’s typical desktop or server. The longer hashes decrease the possibility of collision (two distinct files yielding the same hash).
Use at least `SHA256` when hashing passwords or other security- sensitive data.` MD5 and SHA1` are considered insecure for this purpose and are suitable to protect only against accidental corruption, not deliberate tampering.

# Hashing Passwords
The longer SHA algorithms are suitable as a basis for password hashing, if you enforce a strong password policy to mitigate a dictionary attack—a strategy whereby an attacker builds a password lookup table by hashing every word in a dictionary.
A standard technique, when hashing passwords, is to incorporate `“salt”—a long series of bytes that you initially obtain via a random number generator and then combine with each password before hashing`. This frustrates hackers in two ways:
• They must also know the salt bytes.
• They cannot use rainbow tables (publicly available precomputed databases of passwords and their hashcodes), although a dictionary attack might still be possible with sufficient computing power.

You can further strengthen security by “stretching” your password hashes—repeat‐ edly rehashing to obtain more computationally intensive byte sequences. If you rehash 100 times, a dictionary attack that might otherwise take one month would take eight years. The KeyDerivation, Rfc2898DeriveBytes, and PasswordDerive Bytes classes perform exactly this kind of stretching while also allowing for conve‐ nient salting. Of these, KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2 offers the best hashing:
```c#
byte[] encrypted = KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2 (
        password: "stRhong%pword",
        salt: Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes ("j78Y#p)/saREN!y3@"),
        prf: KeyDerivationPrf.HMACSHA512,
        iterationCount: 100,
        numBytesRequested: 64);
```

KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2 requires the NuGet package Micro soft.AspNetCore.Cryptography.KeyDerivation. Though it’s in the ASP.NET Core namespace, any .NET application can use it.

# Symmetric Encryption
Symmetric encryption uses the same key for encryption as for decryption. The .NET BCL provides four symmetric algorithms, of which Rijndael (pronounced “Rhine Dahl” or “Rain Doll”) is the premium; the other algorithms are intended mainly for compatibility with older applications. Rijndael is both fast and secure and has two implementations:
• `TheRijndaelclass` 
• `TheAesclass`

The two are almost identical, except that Aes does not let you weaken the cipher by changing the block size. Aes is recommended by the CLR’s security team.
Rijndael and Aes allow symmetric keys of length 16, 24, or 32 bytes: all are cur‐ rently considered secure. Here’s how to encrypt a series of bytes as they’re written to a file, using a 16-byte key:
```c#
    byte[] key = {145,12,32,245,98,132,98,214,6,77,131,44,221,3,9,50};
    byte[] iv  = {15,122,132,5,93,198,44,31,9,39,241,49,250,188,80,7};
    byte[] data = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };   // This is what we're encrypting.
    using (SymmetricAlgorithm algorithm = Aes.Create())
    using (ICryptoTransform encryptor = algorithm.CreateEncryptor (key, iv))
    using (Stream f = File.Create ("encrypted.bin"))
    using (Stream c = new CryptoStream (f, encryptor, CryptoStreamMode.Write))
c.Write (data, 0, data.Length);
```
The following code decrypts the file:
```c#
    byte[] key = {145,12,32,245,98,132,98,214,6,77,131,44,221,3,9,50};
    byte[] iv  = {15,122,132,5,93,198,44,31,9,39,241,49,250,188,80,7};
    byte[] decrypted = new byte[5];
    using (SymmetricAlgorithm algorithm = Aes.Create())
    using (ICryptoTransform decryptor = algorithm.CreateDecryptor (key, iv))
    using (Stream f = File.OpenRead ("encrypted.bin"))
    using (Stream c = new CryptoStream (f, decryptor, CryptoStreamMode.Read))
      for (int b; (b = c.ReadByte()) > -1;)
        Console.Write (b + " ");                            // 1 2 3 4 5
```
In this example, we made up a key of 16 randomly chosen bytes. If the wrong key was used in decryption, CryptoStream would throw a CryptographicException. Catching this exception is the only way to test whether a key is correct.

The cryptography work is divided among the classes. Aes is the mathematician; it applies the cipher algorithm, along with its encryptor and decryptor transforms. CryptoStream is the plumber; it takes care of stream plumbing. You can replace Aes with a different symmetric algorithm yet still use CryptoStream.
CryptoStream is bidirectional, meaning you can read or write to the stream depend‐ ing on whether you choose CryptoStreamMode.Read or CryptoStreamMode.Write. Both encryptors and decryptors are read and write savvy, yielding four combina‐ tions—the choice can have you staring at a blank screen for a while! It can be helpful to model reading as “pulling” and writing as “pushing.” If in doubt, start with Write for encryption and Read for decryption; this is often the most natural.
To generate a random key or IV, use RandomNumberGenerator in System.Cryptog raphy. The numbers it produces are genuinely unpredictable, or cryptographically strong (the System.Random class does not offer the same guarantee). Here’s an example:
    byte[] key = new byte [16];
    byte[] iv  = new byte [16];
    RandomNumberGenerator rand = RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
    rand.GetBytes (key);
    rand.GetBytes (iv);
Or, from .NET 6:
    byte[] key = RandomNumberGenerator.GetBytes (16);
    byte[] iv = RandomNumberGenerator.GetBytes (16);
If you don’t specify a key and IV, cryptographically strong random values are generated automatically. You can query these through the Aes object’s Key and IV properties.

# Encrypting in Memory

```c#
From .NET 6, you can utilize the EncryptCbc and DecryptCbc methods to shortcut the process of encrypting and decrypting byte arrays:
    public static byte[] Encrypt (byte[] data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
      using Aes algorithm = Aes.Create();
          algorithm.Key = key;
      return algorithm.EncryptCbc (data, iv);
    }
    public static byte[] Decrypt (byte[] data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
      using Aes algorithm = Aes.Create();
      algorithm.Key = key;
      return algorithm.DecryptCbc (data, iv);
}


```

Here’s an equivalent that works in all.NET versions:
    public static byte[] Encrypt (byte[] data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
      using (Aes algorithm = Aes.Create())
      using (ICryptoTransform encryptor = algorithm.CreateEncryptor (key, iv))
        return Crypt (data, encryptor);
    }
    public static byte[] Decrypt (byte[] data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
      using (Aes algorithm = Aes.Create())
      using (ICryptoTransform decryptor = algorithm.CreateDecryptor (key, iv))
        return Crypt (data, decryptor);
    }
    static byte[] Crypt (byte[] data, ICryptoTransform cryptor)
    {
      MemoryStream m = new MemoryStream();
      using (Stream c = new CryptoStream (m, cryptor, CryptoStreamMode.Write))
        c.Write (data, 0, data.Length);
      return m.ToArray();
}
Here, CryptoStreamMode.Write works best for both encryption and decryption,
since in both cases we’re “pushing” into a fresh memory stream. Here are overloads that accept and return strings:
    public static string Encrypt (string data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
return Convert.ToBase64String (
Encrypt (Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes (data), key, iv));
}
    public static string Decrypt (string data, byte[] key, byte[] iv)
    {
return Encoding.UTF8.GetString (
Decrypt (Convert.FromBase64String (data), key, iv));
}
The following demonstrates their use:
    byte[] key = new byte[16];
    byte[] iv = new byte[16];
     var cryptoRng = RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
    cryptoRng.GetBytes (key);
    cryptoRng.GetBytes (iv);
string encrypted = Encrypt ("Yeah!", key, iv);
Console.WriteLine (encrypted); // R1/5gYvcxyR2vzPjnT7yaQ==
    string decrypted = Decrypt (encrypted, key, iv);
    Console.WriteLine (decrypted);                 // Yeah!

# Key Management
Key management is a critical element of security: if your keys are exposed, so is your data. You need to consider who should have access to keys and how to back them up in case of hardware failure while storing them in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
It is inadvisable to hardcode encryption keys because popular tools exist to decom‐ pile assemblies with little expertise required. A better option (on Windows) is to manufacture a random key for each installation, storing it securely with Windows Data Protection.
For applications deployed to the cloud, Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services (AWS) offer key-management systems with additional features that can be useful in an enterprise environment, such as audit trails.
If you’re encrypting a message stream, public-key encryption still provides the best option.

# Public-Key Encryption and Signing
Public-key cryptography is asymmetric, meaning that encryption and decryption use different keys.
Unlike symmetric encryption, for which any arbitrary series of bytes of appropriate length can serve as a key, asymmetric cryptography requires specially crafted key pairs. A key pair contains a public key and private key component that work together as follows:
• The public key encrypts messages.
• The private key decrypts messages.
The party “crafting” a key pair keeps the private key secret while distributing the public key freely. A special feature of this type of cryptography is that you cannot calculate a private key from a public key. So, if the private key is lost, encrypted data cannot be recovered; conversely, if a private key is leaked, the encryption system becomes useless.
A public key handshake allows two computers to communicate securely over a public network, with no prior contact and no existing shared secret. To see how

this works, suppose that computer Origin wants to send a confidential message to computer Target:
1. Target generates a public/private key pair and then sends its public key to Origin.
2. Origin encrypts the confidential message using Target’s public key and then sends it to Target.
3. Target decrypts the confidential message using its private key. An eavesdropper will see the following:
• Target’s public key
• The secret message, encrypted with Target’s public key

# The RSA Class
.NET provides a number of asymmetric algorithms, of which RSA is the most popular. Here’s how to encrypt and decrypt with RSA:
    byte[] data = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };   // This is what we're encrypting.
    using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      byte[] encrypted = rsa.Encrypt (data, true);
      byte[] decrypted = rsa.Decrypt (encrypted, true);
    }