# The Assembly Manifest
The assembly manifest serves two purposes:
• It describes the assembly to the managed hosting environment.
• It acts as a directory to the modules, types, and resources in the assembly.
Assemblies are thus self-describing. A consumer can discover all of an assembly’s data, types, and functions—without needing additional files.
An assembly manifest is not something you add explicitly to an assembly—it’s automatically embedded into an assembly as part of compilation.
Here’s a summary of the functionally significant data stored in the manifest:
• The simple name of the assembly
• A version number (AssemblyVersion)
• A public key and signed hash of the assembly, if strongly named
• A list of referenced assemblies, including their version and public key
• A list of types defined in the assembly
• The culture it targets, if a satellite assembly (AssemblyCulture)
The manifest can also store the following informational data:
• A full title and description (AssemblyTitle and AssemblyDescription)
• Company and copyright information (AssemblyCompany and AssemblyCopy right)
• A display version (AssemblyInformationalVersion)
• Additional attributes for custom data
Some of this data is derived from arguments given to the compiler, such as the list of referenced assemblies or the public key with which to sign the assembly. The rest comes from assembly attributes, indicated in parentheses.

# Specifying assembly attributes
Commonly used assembly attributes can be specified in Visual Studio on the proj‐ ect’s Properties page, on the Package tab. The settings on that tab are added to the project file (.csproj).
To specify attributes not supported by the Package tab, or if not working with a .csproj file, you can specify assembly attributes in source code (this is often done in a file called called AssemblyInfo.cs).
A dedicated attributes file contains only using statements and assembly attribute declarations. For example, to expose internally scoped types to a unit test project, you would do this:
    using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;
    [assembly:InternalsVisibleTo("MyUnitTestProject")]

# The Application Manifest (Windows)
An application manifest is an XML file that communicates information about the assembly to the OS. An application manifest is embedded into the startup executable as a Win32 resource during the build process. If present, the manifest is read and processed before the CLR loads the assembly—and can influence how Windows launches the application’s process.
A .NET application manifest has a root element called assembly in the XML name‐ space urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1:
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
    <assembly manifestVersion="1.0" xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1">
      <!-- contents of manifest -->
    </assembly>
The following manifest instructs the OS to request administrative elevation:
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
    <assembly manifestVersion="1.0" xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1">
      <trustInfo xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v2">
        <security>
          <requestedPrivileges>
            <requestedExecutionLevel level="requireAdministrator" />
          </requestedPrivileges>
        </security>
      </trustInfo>
    </assembly>
(UWP applications have a far more elaborate manifest, described in the Package .appxmanifest file. This includes a declaration of the program’s capabilities, which

determine permissions granted by the OS. The easiest way to edit this file is with Visual Studio, which displays a dialog when you double-click the manifest file.)
# Deploying an application manifest
You can add an application manifest to a .NET project in Visual Studio by right- clicking your project in Solution Explorer, selecting Add, then New Item, and then choosing Application Manifest File. Upon building, the manifest will be embedded into the output assembly.
The .NET tool ildasm.exe is blind to the presence of an embedded application manifest. Visual Studio, however, indi‐ cates whether an embedded application manifest is present if you double-click the assembly in Solution Explorer.

# Modules
The contents of an assembly are actually packaged within an intermediate container, called a module. A module corresponds to a file containing the contents of an assembly. The reason for this extra layer of containership is to allow an assembly to span multiple files, a feature present in .NET Framework but absent in .NET 5 and .NET Core. Figure 17-1 illustrates the relationship.

`Myapp.exe`:
- Maniftest
- ILCode+ type metadata
- Resource

# The Assembly Class
The Assembly class in System.Reflection is a gateway to accessing assembly meta‐ data at runtime. There are a number of ways to obtain an assembly object: the simplest is via a Type’s Assembly property:
    Assembly a = typeof (Program).Assembly;


# Strong Names and Assembly Signing
Strongly naming an assembly was important in .NET Frame‐ work for two reasons:
• It allowed the assembly to be loaded into the “Global assembly cache.”
• It allowed the assembly to by referenced by other strongly named assemblies.
Strong naming is much less important in .NET 5 and .NET Core, because these runtimes do not have a global assembly cache, nor do they impose the second restriction.
A strongly named assembly has a unique identity. It works by adding two bits of metadata to the manifest:
• A unique number that belongs to the authors of the assembly
• A signed hash of the assembly, proving that the unique number holder pro‐
duced the assembly
This requires a public/private key pair. The public key provides the unique identify‐
ing number, and the private key facilitates signing.

The public key is valuable in guaranteeing the uniqueness of assembly references: a strongly named assembly incorporates the public key into its identity.
In .NET Framework, the private key protects your assembly from tampering, in that without your private key, no one can release a modified version of the assembly without the signature breaking. In practice, this is of use when loading an assembly into .NET Framework’s global assembly cache. In .NET 5 and .NET Core, the signa‐ ture is of little use because it’s never checked.
Adding a strong name to a previously “weak” named assembly changes its identity. For this reason, it pays to strong-name an assembly from the outset if you think the assembly might need a strong name in the future.

# Code-Signing Certificate
Code-signing certificates are used to digitally sign an assembly in .NET. Digital signatures provide a mechanism to verify the authenticity and integrity of an assembly, ensuring that it has not been tampered with or modified since it was signed. When an assembly is signed with a code-signing certificate, the certificate is embedded in the assembly and can be used to verify the assembly's authenticity.

Using a code-signing certificate provides several benefits:

It ensures that the assembly has not been tampered with or modified since it was signed.
It helps prevent unauthorized changes to the assembly.
It provides a mechanism for identifying the publisher of the assembly.
It can help build trust with users who are downloading and installing the assembly.
In some cases, such as when developing applications for certain platforms or distributing software through certain channels, a code-signing certificate may be required.