# .resources Files
.resources files are containers for potentially localizable content. A .resources file ends up as an embedded resource within an assembly—just like any other kind of file. The difference is that you must do the following:
• Package your content into the .resources file to begin with
• Access its content through a ResourceManager or pack URI rather than a Get
    ManifestResourceStream
.resources files are structured in binary and so are not human-editable; therefore, you must rely on tools provided by .NET and Visual Studio to work with them. The standard approach with strings or simple data types is to use the .resx format, which can be converted to a .resources file either by Visual Studio or the resgen tool. The .resx format is also suitable for images intended for a Windows Forms or ASP.NET application.

In a WPF application, you must use Visual Studio’s “Resource” build action for images or similar content needing to be referenced by URI. This applies whether localization is needed or not.
We describe how to do each of these in the following sections.
# .resx Files
A .resx file is a design-time format for producing .resources files. A .resx file uses XML and is structured with name/value pairs as follows:
    <root>
      <data name="Greeting">
        <value>hello</value>
      </data>
      <data name="DefaultFontSize" type="System.Int32, mscorlib">
        <value>10</value>
      </data>
    </root>
To create a .resx file in Visual Studio, add a project item of type Resources File. The rest of the work is done automatically:
• The correct header is created.
• A designer is provided for adding strings, images, files, and other kinds of data.
• The .resx file is automatically converted to the .resources format and embedded into the assembly upon compilation.
• A class is written to help you access the data later on.

# Satellite Assemblies
Data embedded in .resources is localizable.
Resource localization is relevant when your application runs on a version of Win‐ dows built to display everything in a different language. For consistency, your application should use that same language, too.
A typical setup is as follows:
• The main assembly contains .resources for the default, or fallback, language.
• Separate satellite assemblies contain localized .resources translated to different languages.
When your application runs, .NET examines the language of the current OS (from CultureInfo.CurrentUICulture). Whenever you request a resource using ResourceManager, the runtime looks for a localized satellite assembly. If one’s avail‐ able—and it contains the resource key you requested—it’s used in place of the main assembly’s version.
This means that you can enhance language support simply by adding new satel‐ lites—without changing the main assembly.
A satellite assembly cannot contain executable code, only resources.
Satellite assemblies are deployed in subdirectories of the assembly’s folder, as follows:
    programBaseFolder\MyProgram.exe
                     \MyLibrary.exe
\XX\MyProgram.resources.dll \XX\MyLibrary.resources.dll
XX refers to the two-letter language code (such as “de” for German) or a language and region code (such as “en-GB” for English in Great Britain). This naming system allows the CLR to find and load the correct satellite assembly automatically.