# X-DOM Overview
Figure 10-1 shows the core X-DOM types. The most frequently used of these types is XElement. XObject is the root of the inheritance hierarchy; XElement and XDocument are roots of the containership hierarchy.
https://learning.oreilly.com/api/v2/epubs/urn:orm:book:9781098121945/files/assets/cn10_1001.png

```c#
string xml = @"<customer id='123' status='archived'>
                 <firstname>Joe</firstname>
                 <lastname>Bloggs<!--nice name--></lastname>
               </customer>";

XElement customer = XElement.Parse (xml);
```

`XObject` is the abstract base class for all XML content. It defines a link to the Parent element in the containership tree as well as an optional XDocument.
`XNode` is the base class for most XML content excluding attributes. The distinguishing feature of XNode is that it can sit in an ordered collection of mixed-type XNodes. For instance, consider the following XML:

<data>
  Hello world
  <subelement1/>
  <!--comment-->
  <subelement2/>
</data>
Within the parent element <data>, there’s first an XText node (Hello world), then an XElement node, then an XComment node, and then a second XElement node. In contrast, an XAttribute will tolerate only other XAttributes as peers.

Although an XNode can access its parent XElement, it has no concept of child nodes: this is the job of its subclass XContainer. XContainer defines members for dealing with children and is the abstract base class for XElement and XDocument.

`XElement` introduces members for managing attributes—as well as a Name and Value. In the (fairly common) case of an element having a single XText child node, the Value property on XElement encapsulates this child’s content for both get and set operations, cutting unnecessary navigation. Thanks to Value, you can mostly avoid working directly with XText nodes.

`XDocument` represents the root of an XML tree. More precisely, it wraps the root XElement, adding an XDeclaration, processing instructions, and other root-level “fluff.” Unlike with the W3C DOM, its use is optional: you can load, manipulate, and save an X-DOM without ever creating an XDocument! The nonreliance on XDocument also means that you can efficiently and easily move a node subtree to another X-DOM hierarchy.

# Loading and Parsing
Both XElement and XDocument provide static Load and Parse methods to build an X-DOM tree from an existing source:

Load builds an X-DOM from a file, URI, Stream, TextReader, or XmlReader.

Parse builds an X-DOM from a string.

For example:
```c#
XDocument fromWeb = XDocument.Load ("http://albahari.com/sample.xml");

XElement fromFile = XElement.Load (@"e:\media\somefile.xml");

XElement config = XElement.Parse (
@"<configuration>
    <client enabled='true'>
      <timeout>30</timeout>
    </client>
  </configuration>");
```
In later sections, we describe how to traverse and update an X-DOM. As a quick preview, here’s how to manipulate the config element we just populated:

In later sections, we describe how to traverse and update an X-DOM. As a quick preview, here’s how to manipulate the config element we just populated:
```c#
foreach (XElement child in config.Elements())
  Console.WriteLine (child.Name);                     // client
```

```c#
XElement client = config.Element ("client");

bool enabled = (bool) client.Attribute ("enabled");   // Read attribute
Console.WriteLine (enabled);                          // True
client.Attribute ("enabled").SetValue (!enabled);     // Update attribute

int timeout = (int) client.Element ("timeout");       // Read element
Console.WriteLine (timeout);                          // 30
client.Element ("timeout").SetValue (timeout * 2);    // Update element

client.Add (new XElement ("retries", 3));             // Add new element

Console.WriteLine (config);         // Implicitly call config.ToString()
```
Here’s the result of that last Console.WriteLine:

<configuration>
  <client enabled="false">
    <timeout>60</timeout>
    <retries>3</retries>
  </client>
</configuration>