
# Composition Strategies
In this section, we describe three strategies for building more complex queries:
  - Progressive query construction
  - Using the into keyword
  - Wrapping queries
All are chaining strategies and produce identical runtime queries.

# Progressive Query Building
At the start of the chapter, we demonstrated how you could build a fluent query progressively:

var filtered   = names    .Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"));
var sorted     = filtered .OrderBy (n => n);
var query      = sorted   .Select  (n => n.ToUpper());
Because each of the participating query operators returns a decorator sequence, the resultant query is the same chain or layering of decorators that you would get from a single-expression query. There are a couple of potential benefits, however, to building queries progressively:

It can make queries easier to write.

You can add query operators conditionally. For example,

if (includeFilter) query = query.Where (...)
is more efficient than
```c#
query = query.Where (n => !includeFilter || <expression>)
```
because it avoids adding an extra query operator if includeFilter is false.

A progressive approach is often useful in query comprehensions. Imagine that we want to remove all vowels from a list of names and then present in alphabetical order those whose length is still more than two characters. In fluent syntax, we could write this query as a single expression—by projecting before we filter:
```
IEnumerable<string> query = names
  .Select  (n => n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                  .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", ""))
  .Where   (n => n.Length > 2)
  .OrderBy (n => n);

// Dck
// Hrry
// Mry
```
`NOTE`
Rather than calling string’s Replace method five times, we could remove vowels from a string more efficiently with a regular expression:
```c#
n => Regex.Replace (n, "[aeiou]", "")
```
string’s `Replace method has the advantage, though, of also working in database queries.`

Translating this directly into a query expression is troublesome because the select clause must come after the where and orderby clauses. And if we rearrange the query so as to project last, the result would be different:
```c#
IEnumerable<string> query =
  from    n in names
  where   n.Length > 2
  orderby n
  select  n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
           .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "");

// Dck
// Hrry
// Jy
// Mry
// Tm
```

`Fortunately`, there are a number of ways to get the original result in query syntax. The first is by querying progressively:
```c#
IEnumerable<stcring> query =
  from   n in names
  select n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
          .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "");

query = from n in query where n.Length > 2 orderby n select n;

// Dck
// Hrry
// Mry
```

# The into Keyword
`NOTE`
The into keyword is interpreted in two very different ways by query expressions, depending on context. The meaning we’re describing now is for signaling query continuation (the other is for signaling a GroupJoin).

The `into` keyword lets you `continue` a query after a projection and is a `shortcut for progressively querying`. With into, we can rewrite the preceding query as follows:
```c#
IEnumerable<string> query =
  from   n in names
  select n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
          .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  into noVowel
    where noVowel.Length > 2 orderby noVowel select noVowel;
```
The only place you can use into is after a select or group clause. into `restarts` a query, allowing you to introduce fresh where, orderby, and select clauses.
`
NOTE
Although it’s easiest to think of into as restarting a query from the perspective of a query expression, it’s all one query when translated to its final fluent form. Hence, there’s no intrinsic performance hit with into. Nor do you lose any points for its use!
The equivalent of into in fluent syntax is simply a longer chain of operators.

# Scoping rules
All range variables are out of scope following an into keyword. The following will not compile:
```c#
var query =
  from n1 in names
  select n1.ToUpper()
  into n2                              // Only n2 is visible from here on.
    where n1.Contains ("x")            // Illegal: n1 is not in scope.
    select n2;
```
To see why, consider how this maps to fluent syntax:
```c#
var query = names
  .Select (n1 => n1.ToUpper())
  .Where  (n2 => n1.Contains ("x"));     // Error: n1 no longer in scope
```
The original name (n1) is lost by the time the Where filter runs. Where’s input sequence contains only uppercase names, so it cannot filter based on n1.

# Wrapping Queries
A query built progressively can be formulated into a single statement by wrapping one query around another. In general terms,
```c#
var tempQuery = tempQueryExpr
var finalQuery = from ... in tempQuery ...
```
can be reformulated as:
```c#
var finalQuery = from ... in (tempQueryExpr)
```

Wrapping is semantically identical to progressive query building or using the into keyword (without the intermediate variable). The end result in all cases is a linear chain of query operators. For example, consider the following query:

```c#
IEnumerable<string> query =
  from   n in names
  select n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
          .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "");

query = from n in query where n.Length > 2 orderby n select n;
```

Reformulated in wrapped form, it’s the following:
```
IEnumerable<string> query =
  from n1 in
  (
    from   n2 in names
    select n2.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
             .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  )
  where n1.Length > 2 orderby n1 select n1;
```
When converted to fluent syntax, the result is the same linear chain of operators as in previous examples:
```c#
IEnumerable<string> query = names
  .Select  (n => n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                  .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", ""))
  .Where   (n => n.Length > 2)
  .OrderBy (n => n);
```
(The compiler does not emit the final .Select (n => n), because it’s redundant.)

Wrapped queries can be confusing because they resemble the subqueries we wrote earlier. Both have the concept of an inner and outer query. When converted to fluent syntax, however, you can see that wrapping is simply a strategy for sequentially chaining operators. The end result bears no resemblance to a subquery, which embeds an inner query within the lambda expression of another.