# Projection Strategies

# Object Initializers
So far, all of our select clauses have projected scalar element types. With C# object initializers, you can project into more complex types. For example, suppose, as a first step in a query, we want to strip vowels from a list of names while still retaining the original versions alongside, for the benefit of subsequent queries. We can write the following class to assist:

class TempProjectionItem
{
  public string Original;    // Original name
  public string Vowelless;   // Vowel-stripped name
}
We then can project into it with object initializers:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };

IEnumerable<TempProjectionItem> temp =
  from n in names
  select new TempProjectionItem
  {
    Original  = n,
    Vowelless = n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                 .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  };
The result is of type IEnumerable<TempProjectionItem>, which we can subsequently query:

IEnumerable<string> query = from   item in temp
                            where  item.Vowelless.Length > 2
                            select item.Original;
// Dick
// Harry
// Mary

# Anonymous Types
Anonymous types allow you to structure your intermediate results without writing special classes. We can eliminate the TempProjectionItem class in our previous example with anonymous types:

var intermediate = from n in names

  select new
  {
    Original = n,
    Vowelless = n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                 .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  };

IEnumerable<string> query = from   item in intermediate
                            where  item.Vowelless.Length > 2
                            select item.Original;
This gives the same result as the previous example, but without needing to write a one-off class. The compiler does the job instead, generating a temporary class with fields that match the structure of our projection. This means, however, that the intermediate query has the following type:

IEnumerable <random-compiler-generated-name>
The only way we can declare a variable of this type is with the var keyword. In this case, var is more than just a clutter reduction device; it’s a necessity.

We can write the entire query more succinctly with the into keyword:

var query = from n in names
  select new
  {
     Original = n,
     Vowelless = n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                  .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  }
  into temp
  where temp.Vowelless.Length > 2
  select temp.Original;
Query expressions provide a shortcut for writing this kind of query: the let keyword.

# The let Keyword
The let keyword introduces a new variable alongside the range variable.

With let, we can write a query extracting strings whose length, excluding vowels, exceeds two characters, as follows:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };

IEnumerable<string> query =
  from n in names
  let vowelless = n.Replace ("a", "").Replace ("e", "").Replace ("i", "")
                   .Replace ("o", "").Replace ("u", "")
  where vowelless.Length > 2
  orderby vowelless
  select n;       // Thanks to let, n is still in scope.
The compiler resolves a let clause by projecting into a temporary anonymous type that contains both the range variable and the new expression variable. In other words, the compiler translates this query into the preceding example.

let accomplishes two things:

It projects new elements alongside existing elements.

It allows an expression to be used repeatedly in a query without being rewritten.

The let approach is particularly advantageous in this example because it allows the select clause to project either the original name (n) or its vowel-removed version (vowelless).

You can have any number of let statements before or after a where statement (see Figure 8-2). A let statement can reference variables introduced in earlier let statements (subject to the boundaries imposed by an into clause). let reprojects all existing variables transparently.

A let expression need not evaluate to a scalar type: sometimes it’s useful to have it evaluate to a subsequence, for instance.