# Memory pooling
`Memory pooling` is a technique to reuse allocated memory rather than freeing and reallocating it frequently. When an application frequently allocates and deallocates memory, it can result in unnecessary pressure on the garbage collector, which can negatively impact the application's performance.

The `System.Buffers.MemoryPool<T>` class provides a way to rent and return memory blocks, which can be used to `avoid excessive allocations and deallocations`. The class offers several Rent() and Return() methods to acquire and release memory blocks respectively.

```c#
// create a memory pool with default options
MemoryPool<byte> pool = MemoryPool<byte>.Shared;

// rent a block of memory with a size of 1024 bytes
Memory<byte> rentedMemory = pool.Rent(1024);

// use the memory block
for (int i = 0; i < rentedMemory.Length; i++)
{
    rentedMemory.Span[i] = (byte)i;
}

// return the memory block to the pool
pool.Return(rentedMemory);

```

In the above example, we create a shared MemoryPool<byte> instance and rent a block of 1024 bytes from it using the Rent() method. We then use the rented memory block to store some data and then return the block to the pool using the Return() method. This allows the memory block to be reused by other parts of the application without requiring additional allocations.

To get data from a memory pool, you can use the MemoryPool<T>.Rent() method to rent a Memory<T> object. This method returns a rented Memory<T> object with a specified minimum length.
```c#
var pool = MemoryPool<byte>.Shared;
Memory<byte> buffer = pool.Rent(1024); // Rent a 1 KB buffer from the pool
try
{
    // Use the buffer to read data from a stream or socket, for example
    int bytesRead = await stream.ReadAsync(buffer);
    
    // Process the data in the buffer
    ProcessData(buffer.Span.Slice(0, bytesRead));
}
finally
{
    // Return the buffer to the pool when you're done using it
    pool.Return(buffer);
}

```

In this example, we're using the MemoryPool<byte>.Shared property to get a shared memory pool that can be used by multiple components in the application. We're then renting a Memory<byte> object with a length of 1024 bytes using the pool.Rent(1024) method. We're using the try...finally block to ensure that the buffer is returned to the pool, even if an exception is thrown. We're using the Slice method to create a new ReadOnlySpan<T> that represents only the data that was actually read from the stream, and we're passing this span to a ProcessData method for further processing.

When you're done using the buffer, you should call the pool.Return(buffer) method to return the buffer to the pool. This allows the memory pool to reuse the buffer for other purposes, rather than allocating new memory every time you need a buffer.