# The RSA Class
.NET provides a number of asymmetric algorithms, of which RSA is the most popular. Here’s how to encrypt and decrypt with RSA:
    byte[] data = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };   // This is what we're encrypting.
    using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      byte[] encrypted = rsa.Encrypt (data, true);
      byte[] decrypted = rsa.Decrypt (encrypted, true);
    }

Because we didn’t specify a public or private key, the cryptographic provider auto‐ matically generated a key pair, using the default length of 1,024 bits; you can request longer keys in increments of eight bytes, through the constructor. For security-critical applications, it’s prudent to request 2,048 bits:
    var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider (2048);
Generating a key pair is computationally intensive—taking perhaps 100 ms. For this reason, the RSA implementation delays this until a key is actually needed, such as when calling Encrypt. This gives you the chance to load in an existing key—or key pair, should it exist.
The methods ImportCspBlob and ExportCspBlob load and save keys in byte array format. FromXmlString and ToXmlString do the same job in a string format, the string containing an XML fragment. A bool flag lets you indicate whether to include the private key when saving. Here’s how to manufacture a key pair and save it to disk:
    using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      File.WriteAllText ("PublicKeyOnly.xml", rsa.ToXmlString (false));
      File.WriteAllText ("PublicPrivate.xml", rsa.ToXmlString (true));
    }
Because we didn’t provide existing keys, ToXmlString forced the manufacture of a fresh key pair (on the first call). In the next example, we read back these keys and use them to encrypt and decrypt a message:
    byte[] data = Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes ("Message to encrypt");
    string publicKeyOnly = File.ReadAllText ("PublicKeyOnly.xml");
    string publicPrivate = File.ReadAllText ("PublicPrivate.xml");
byte[] encrypted, decrypted;
    using (var rsaPublicOnly = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      rsaPublicOnly.FromXmlString (publicKeyOnly);
      encrypted = rsaPublicOnly.Encrypt (data, true);
      // The next line would throw an exception because you need the private
      // key in order to decrypt:
      // decrypted = rsaPublicOnly.Decrypt (encrypted, true);
}
    using (var rsaPublicPrivate = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      // With the private key we can successfully decrypt:
      rsaPublicPrivate.FromXmlString (publicPrivate);
      decrypted = rsaPublicPrivate.Decrypt (encrypted, true);
}