# Interfaces
An interface is similar to a class, but only specifies behavior and does not hold state (data). Consequently:

- An interface can define only functions and not fields.

- Interface members are implicitly abstract. (Although nonabstract functions are permitted from C# 8, this is considered a special case, which we describe in “Default Interface Members”.)

- A class (or struct) can implement multiple interfaces. In contrast, a class can inherit from only a single class, and a struct cannot inherit at all (aside from deriving from System.ValueType).

An interface declaration is like a class declaration, but it (typically) provides no implementation for its members because its members are implicitly abstract. These members will be implemented by the classes and structs that implement the interface. An interface can contain `only functions, that is, methods, properties, events, and indexers (which noncoincidentally are precisely the members of a class that can be abstract)`.

```c#
public interface IEnumerator
{
  bool MoveNext();
  object Current { get; }
  void Reset();
}
```
Interface members are always implicitly public and cannot declare an access modifier. Implementing an interface means providing a public implementation for all of its members:
```c#
internal class Countdown : IEnumerator
{
  int count = 11;
  public bool MoveNext() => count-- > 0;
  public object Current => count;
  public void Reset() { throw new NotSupportedException(); }
}
```
You can implicitly cast an object to any interface that it implements:
```c#
IEnumerator e = new Countdown();
while (e.MoveNext())
  Console.Write (e.Current);      // 109876543210

```
Even though Countdown is an internal class, its members that implement IEnumerator can be called publicly by casting an instance of Countdown to IEnumerator. For instance, if a public type in the same assembly defined a method as follows:

public static class Util
{
  public static object GetCountDown() => new CountDown();
}
a caller from another assembly could do this:

IEnumerator e = (IEnumerator) Util.GetCountDown();
e.MoveNext();

If IEnumerator were itself defined as internal, this wouldn’t be possible.

# Extending an Interface
Interfaces can derive from other interfaces; for instance:
```c#
public interface IUndoable             { void Undo(); }
public interface IRedoable : IUndoable { void Redo(); }
```
IRedoable “inherits” all the members of IUndoable. In other words, types that implement IRedoable must also implement the members of IUndoable.

# Explicit Interface Implementation

Implementing multiple interfaces can sometimes result in a collision between member signatures. You can resolve such collisions by explicitly implementing an interface member. Consider the following example:
```c#
interface I1 { void Foo(); }
interface I2 { int Foo(); }

public class Widget : I1, I2
{
  public void Foo()
  {
    Console.WriteLine ("Widget's implementation of I1.Foo");
  }

  int I2.Foo()
  {
    Console.WriteLine ("Widget's implementation of I2.Foo");
    return 42;
  }
}

Widget w = new Widget();
w.Foo();                      // Widget's implementation of I1.Foo
((I1)w).Foo();                // Widget's implementation of I1.Foo
((I2)w).Foo();                // Widget's implementation of I2.Foo
```
# Implementing Interface Members Virtually

An implicitly implemented interface member is, by default, sealed. It must be marked virtual or abstract in the base class in order to be overridden:
```c#
public interface IUndoable { void Undo(); }

public class TextBox : IUndoable
{
  public virtual void Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("TextBox.Undo");
}

public class RichTextBox : TextBox
{
  public override void Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("RichTextBox.Undo");
}
```
Calling the interface member through either the base class or the interface calls the subclass’s implementation:

RichTextBox r = new RichTextBox();
r.Undo();                          // RichTextBox.Undo
((IUndoable)r).Undo();             // RichTextBox.Undo
((TextBox)r).Undo();               // RichTextBox.Undo
An explicitly implemented interface member cannot be marked virtual, nor can it be overridden in the usual manner. It can, however, be reimplemented.

# Reimplementing an Interface in a Subclas
A  subclass can reimplement any interface member already implemented by a base class. Reimplementation hijacks a member implementation (when called through the interface) and works whether or not the member is virtual in the base class. 

In the following example, TextBox implements IUndoable.Undo explicitly, and so it cannot be marked as virtual. To “override” it, RichTextBox must reimplement IUndoable’s Undo method:

public interface IUndoable { void Undo(); }

public class TextBox : IUndoable
{
  void IUndoable.Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("TextBox.Undo");
}

public class RichTextBox : TextBox, IUndoable
{
  public void Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("RichTextBox.Undo");
}
Calling the reimplemented member through the interface calls the subclass’s implementation:

RichTextBox r = new RichTextBox();
r.Undo();                 // RichTextBox.Undo      Case 1
((IUndoable)r).Undo();    // RichTextBox.Undo      Case 2

Assuming the same RichTextBox definition, suppose that TextBox implemented Undo implicitly:
```c#
public class TextBox : IUndoable
{
  public void Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("TextBox.Undo");
}
```
This would give us another way to call Undo, which would “break” the system, as shown in Case 3:

RichTextBox r = new RichTextBox();
r.Undo();                 // RichTextBox.Undo      Case 1
((IUndoable)r).Undo();    // RichTextBox.Undo      Case 2
((TextBox)r).Undo();      // TextBox.Undo          Case 3

Case 3 demonstrates that reimplementation hijacking is effective only when a member is called through the interface and not through the base class. This is usually undesirable in that it can create inconsistent semantics. This makes reimplementation most appropriate as a strategy for overriding explicitly implemented interface members.

Reimplementation can be a good last resort when subclassing hasn’t been anticipated. A better option, however, is to design a base class such that reimplementation will never be required. There are two ways to achieve this:

When implicitly implementing a member, mark it virtual if appropriate.

When explicitly implementing a member, use the following pattern if you anticipate that subclasses might need to override any logic:

public class TextBox : IUndoable
{
  void IUndoable.Undo()         => Undo();    // Calls method below
  protected virtual void Undo() => Console.WriteLine ("TextBox.Undo");
}

public class RichTextBox : TextBox
{
  protected override void Undo() => Console.WriteLine("RichTextBox.Undo");
}
If you don’t anticipate any subclassing, you can mark the class as `sealed` to preempt interface reimplementation.

# Interfaces and Boxing
Converting a struct to an interface causes boxing. Calling an implicitly implemented member on a struct does not cause boxing:
```c#
interface  I { void Foo();          }
struct S : I { public void Foo() {} }

...
S s = new S();
s.Foo();         // No boxing.

I i = s;         // Box occurs when casting to interface.
i.Foo();
```

# Default Interface Members
From C# 8, you can add a default implementation to an interface member, making it optional to implement:

interface ILogger
{
  void Log (string text) => Console.WriteLine (text);
}
This is advantageous if you want to add a member to an interface defined in a popular library without breaking (potentially thousands of) implementations.

Default implementations are always explicit, so if a class implementing ILogger fails to define a Log method, the only way to call it is through the interface:

class Logger : ILogger { }
...
((ILogger)new Logger()).Log ("message");
This prevents a problem of multiple implementation inheritance: if the same default member is added to two interfaces that a class implements, there is never an ambiguity as to which member is called.

Interfaces can also now define static members (including fields), which can be accessed from code inside default implementations:

interface ILogger
{
  void Log (string text) => 
    Console.WriteLine (Prefix + text);

  static string Prefix = ""; 
}
Because interface members are implicitly public, you can also access static members from the outside:

ILogger.Prefix = "File log: ";
You can restrict this by adding an accessibility modifier to the static interface member (such as private, protected, or internal).

Instance fields are (still) prohibited. This is in line with the principle of interfaces, which is to define behavior, not state.`

# WRITING A CLASS VERSUS AN INTERFACE
As a guideline:

Use classes and subclasses for types that naturally share an implementation.

Use interfaces for types that have independent implementations.

Consider the following classes:

abstract class Animal {}
abstract class Bird           : Animal {}
abstract class Insect         : Animal {}
abstract class FlyingCreature : Animal {}
abstract class Carnivore      : Animal {}

// Concrete classes:

class Ostrich : Bird {}
class Eagle   : Bird, FlyingCreature, Carnivore {}  // Illegal
class Bee     : Insect, FlyingCreature {}           // Illegal
class Flea    : Insect, Carnivore {}                // Illegal
The Eagle, Bee, and Flea classes do not compile because inheriting from multiple classes is prohibited. To resolve this, we must convert some of the types to interfaces. The question then arises, which types? Following our general rule, we could say that insects share an implementation, and birds share an implementation, so they remain classes. In contrast, flying creatures have independent mechanisms for flying, and carnivores have independent strategies for eating animals, so we would convert FlyingCreature and Carnivore to interfaces:
```c#
interface IFlyingCreature {}
interface ICarnivore      {}
```
In a typical scenario, Bird and Insect might correspond to a Windows control and a web control; FlyingCreature and Carnivore might correspond to IPrintable and IUndoable.