
# Ref Structs

Ref structs were introduced in C# 7.2 as a niche feature primarily for the benefit of the Span<T> and ReadOnlySpan<T> structs that we describe in Chapter 23 (and the highly optimized Utf8JsonReader that we describe in Chapter 11). These structs help with a micro-optimization technique that aims to reduce memory allocations.

Unlike reference types, whose instances always live on the heap, value types live in-place (wherever the variable was declared). If a value type appears as a parameter or local variable, it will reside on the stack:

void SomeMethod()
{
  Point p;   // p will reside on the stack
}
struct Point { public int X, Y; }
But if a value type appears as a field in a class, it will reside on the heap:

class MyClass
{
  Point p;   // Lives on heap, because MyClass instances live on the heap
}
Similarly, arrays of structs live on the heap, and boxing a struct sends it to the heap.

Adding the ref modifier to a struct’s declaration ensures that it can only ever reside on the stack. Attempting to use a ref struct in such a way that it could reside on the heap generates a compile-time error:

var points = new Point [100];           // Error: will not compile!

ref struct Point { public int X, Y; }
class MyClass    { Point P;         }   // Error: will not compile!

`Ref structs` were introduced mainly for the `benefit of the Span<T> and ReadOnlySpan<T> structs`. Because Span<T> and ReadOnlySpan<T> instances can exist only on the stack, it’s possible for them to safely wrap stack-allocated memory.

Ref structs cannot partake in any C# feature that directly or indirectly introduces the possibility of existing on the heap. This includes a number of advanced C# features that we describe in Chapter 4, namely lambda expressions, iterators, and asynchronous functions (because, behind the scenes, these features all create hidden classes with fields). Also, ref structs cannot appear inside non-ref structs, and they cannot implement interfaces (because this could result in boxing).

# what different ref struct and struct?

A `struct` is a value type in C#, meaning that instances of a struct are allocated on the stack or as part of another object in memory. On the other hand, a `ref struct` is a value type that is restricted to be stack-only.


When a variable of a regular `struct` type is passed as a parameter to a method or assigned to another variable, it gets copied to a new memory location, which can be expensive for large structs. But a `ref struct` cannot be boxed, meaning it cannot be converted to an object reference, and cannot be used in certain contexts such as fields in a class.

Because of the restriction that a `ref struct must be stack-only, it's suitable for low-level programming scenarios such as building high-performance data structures where allocations and copying should be minimized.`