# Enums
An enum is a special value type that lets you specify a group of named numeric constants. For example:

public enum BorderSide { Left, Right, Top, Bottom }
We can use this enum type as follows:

BorderSide topSide = BorderSide.Top;
bool isTop = (topSide == BorderSide.Top);   // true
Each enum member has an underlying integral value. These are by default:

Underlying values are of type int.

The constants 0, 1, 2... are automatically assigned in the declaration order of the enum members.

You can specify an alternative integral type, as follows:

public enum BorderSide : byte { Left, Right, Top, Bottom }
You can also specify an explicit underlying value for each enum member:

public enum BorderSide : byte { Left=1, Right=2, Top=10, Bottom=11 } 
NOTE
The compiler also lets you explicitly assign some of the enum members. The unassigned enum members keep incrementing from the last explicit value. The preceding example is equivalent to the following:

public enum BorderSide : byte
 { Left=1, Right, Top=10, Bottom } // right =2 , bottom = 11
# Enum Conversions
You can convert an enum instance to and from its underlying integral value with an explicit cast:

int i = (int) BorderSide.Left;
BorderSide side = (BorderSide) i;
bool leftOrRight = (int) side <= 2;
You can also explicitly cast one enum type to another. Suppose that Horizontal​Alignment is defined as follows:

public enum HorizontalA⁠lignment
{
  Left = BorderSide.Left,
  Right = BorderSide.Right,
  Center
}
A translation between the enum types uses the underlying integral values:

HorizontalAlignment h = (HorizontalAlignment) BorderSide.Right;
// same as:
HorizontalAlignment h = (HorizontalAlignment) (int) BorderSide.Right;
The numeric literal 0 is treated specially by the compiler in an enum expression and does not require an explicit cast:

BorderSide b = 0;    // No cast required
if (b == 0) ...
There are two reasons for the special treatment of 0:

The first member of an enum is often used as the “default” value.

For combined enum types, 0 means “no flags.”

# Flags Enums
Indicates that an enumeration can be treated as `a bit field; that is, a set of flags`

You can combine enum members. To prevent ambiguities, members of a combinable enum require explicitly assigned values, typically in powers of two:

[Flags]
enum BorderSides { None=0, Left=1, Right=2, Top=4, Bottom=8 }
or:

enum BorderSides { None=0, Left=1, Right=1<<1, Top=1<<2, Bottom=1<<3 }
To work with combined enum values, you use bitwise operators such as | and &. These operate on the underlying integral values:
```c#
BorderSides leftRight = BorderSides.Left | BorderSides.Right;

if ((leftRight & BorderSides.Left) != 0)
  Console.WriteLine ("Includes Left");     // Includes Left

string formatted = leftRight.ToString();   // "Left, Right"

BorderSides s = BorderSides.Left;
s |= BorderSides.Right;
Console.WriteLine (s == leftRight);   // True

s ^= BorderSides.Right;               // Toggles BorderSides.Right
Console.WriteLine (s);                // Left
```

By convention, the Flags attribute should always be applied to an enum type when its members are combinable. If you declare such an enum without the Flags attribute, you can still combine members, but calling ToString on an enum instance will emit a number rather than a series of names.

By convention, a combinable enum type is given a plural rather than singular name.

For convenience, you can include combination members within an enum declaration itself:

```c#
[Flags]
enum BorderSides
{
  None=0,
  Left=1, Right=1<<1, Top=1<<2, Bottom=1<<3,
  LeftRight = Left | Right, 
  TopBottom = Top  | Bottom,
  All       = LeftRight | TopBottom
}
```

# Enum Operators
The operators that work with enums are:

=   ==   !=   <   >   <=   >=   +   -   ^  &  |   ˜
+=   -=   ++  --   sizeof
The bitwise, arithmetic, and comparison operators return the result of processing the underlying integral values. Addition is permitted between an enum and an integral type, but not between two enums.

# Type-Safety Issues
Consider the following enum:

public enum BorderSide { Left, Right, Top, Bottom }
Because an enum can be cast to and from its underlying integral type, the actual value it can have might fall outside the bounds of a legal enum member:

BorderSide b = (BorderSide) 12345;
Console.WriteLine (b);                // 12345
The bitwise and arithmetic operators can produce similarly invalid values:

BorderSide b = BorderSide.Bottom;
b++;                                  // No errors
An invalid BorderSide would break the following code:

void Draw (BorderSide side)
{
  if      (side == BorderSide.Left)  {...}
  else if (side == BorderSide.Right) {...}
  else if (side == BorderSide.Top)   {...}
  else                               {...} // Assume BorderSide.Bottom
}
One solution is to add another else clause:

  ...
  else if (side == BorderSide.Bottom) ...
  else throw new ArgumentException ("Invalid BorderSide: " + side, "side");
Another workaround is to explicitly check an enum value for validity. The static Enum.IsDefined method does this job:

BorderSide side = (BorderSide) 12345;
Console.WriteLine (Enum.IsDefined (typeof (BorderSide), side));   // False
Unfortunately, Enum.IsDefined does not work for flagged enums. However, the following helper method (a trick dependent on the behavior of Enum.ToString()) returns true if a given flagged enum is valid:
```c#
for (int i = 0; i <= 16; i++)
{
  BorderSides side = (BorderSides)i;
  Console.WriteLine (IsFlagDefined (side) + " " + side);
}

bool IsFlagDefined (Enum e)
{
  decimal d;
  return !decimal.TryParse(e.ToString(), out d);
}

[Flags]
public enum BorderSides { Left=1, Right=2, Top=4, Bottom=8 }
```