# Nested Types
A nested type is declared within the scope of another type:

public class TopLevel
{
  public class Nested { }               // Nested class
  public enum Color { Red, Blue, Tan }  // Nested enum
}
A nested type has the following features:

It can access the enclosing type’s private members and everything else the enclosing type can access.

You can declare it with the full range of access modifiers rather than just public and internal.

The default accessibility for a nested type is private rather than internal.

Accessing a nested type from outside the enclosing type requires qualification with the enclosing type’s name (like when accessing static members).

For example, to access Color.Red from outside our TopLevel class, we’d need to do this:

TopLevel.Color color = TopLevel.Color.Red;
All types (classes, structs, interfaces, delegates, and enums) can be nested within either a class or a struct.

Here is an example of accessing a private member of a type from a nested type:

public class TopLevel
{
  static int x;
  class Nested
  {
    static void Foo() { Console.WriteLine (TopLevel.x); }
  }
}
Here is an example of applying the protected access modifier to a nested type:

public class TopLevel
{
  protected class Nested { }
}

public class SubTopLevel : TopLevel
{
  static void Foo() { new TopLevel.Nested(); }
}
Here is an example of referring to a nested type from outside the enclosing type:

public class TopLevel
{
  public class Nested { }
}

class Test
{
  TopLevel.Nested n;
}
Nested types are used heavily by the compiler itself when it generates private classes that capture state for constructs such as iterators and anonymous methods.

# NOTE
If the sole reason for using a nested type is to avoid cluttering a namespace with too many types, consider using a nested namespace instead. A nested type should be used because of its stronger access control restrictions, or when the nested class must access private members of the containing class.