# Generics
C# has two separate mechanisms for writing code that is reusable across different types: inheritance and generics. Whereas inheritance expresses reusability with a base type, generics express reusability with a “template” that contains “placeholder” types. Generics, when compared to inheritance, can increase type safety and reduce casting and boxing.

# Generic Types
A generic type declares type parameters—placeholder types to be filled in by the consumer of the generic type, which supplies the type arguments. Here is a generic type Stack<T>, designed to stack instances of type T. Stack<T> declares a single type parameter T:

public class Stack<T>
{
  int position;
  T[] data = new T[100];
  public void Push (T obj)  => data[position++] = obj;
  public T Pop()            => data[--position];
}
We can use Stack<T> as follows:

var stack = new Stack<int>();
stack.Push (5);
stack.Push (10);
int x = stack.Pop();        // x is 10
int y = stack.Pop();        // y is 5
Stack<int> fills in the type parameter T with the type argument int, implicitly creating a type on the fly (the synthesis occurs at runtime). Attempting to push a string onto our Stack<int> would, however, produce a compile-time error. Stack<int> effectively has the following definition (substitutions appear in bold, with the class name hashed out to avoid confusion):

public class ###
{
  int position;
  int[] data = new int[100];
  public void Push (int obj)  => data[position++] = obj;
  public int Pop()            => data[--position];
}
Technically, we say that Stack<T> is an open type, whereas Stack<int> is a closed type. At runtime, all generic type instances are closed—with the placeholder types filled in. This means that the following statement is illegal:

var stack = new Stack<T>();   // Illegal: What is T?
However, it’s legal if it’s within a class or method that itself defines T as a type parameter:

public class Stack<T>
{
  ...
  public Stack<T> Clone()
  {
    Stack<T> clone = new Stack<T>();   // Legal
    ...
  } 
}

# Why Generics Exist
Generics exist to write code that is reusable across different types. Suppose that we need a stack of integers, but we don’t have generic types. One solution would be to hardcode a separate version of the class for every required element type (e.g., IntStack, StringStack, etc.). Clearly, this would cause considerable code duplication. Another solution would be to write a stack that is generalized by using object as the element type:

public class ObjectStack
{
  int position;
  object[] data = new object[10];
  public void Push (object obj) => data[position++] = obj;
  public object Pop()           => data[--position];
}
An ObjectStack, however, wouldn’t work as well as a hardcoded IntStack for specifically stacking integers. An ObjectStack would require boxing and downcasting that could not be checked at compile time:

// Suppose we just want to store integers here:
ObjectStack stack = new ObjectStack();

stack.Push ("s");          // Wrong type, but no error!
int i = (int)stack.Pop();  // Downcast - runtime error
What we need is both a general implementation of a stack that works for all element types as well as a way to easily specialize that stack to a specific element type for increased type safety and reduced casting and boxing. Generics give us precisely this by allowing us to parameterize the element type. Stack<T> has the benefits of both ObjectStack and IntStack. Like ObjectStack, Stack<T> is written once to work generally across all types. Like IntStack, Stack<T> is specialized for a particular type—the beauty is that this type is T, which we substitute on the fly.

NOTE
ObjectStack is functionally equivalent to Stack<object>.

# Generic Methods
A generic method declares type parameters within the signature of a method.

With generic methods, many fundamental algorithms can be implemented in a general-purpose way. Here is a generic method that swaps the contents of two variables of any type T:

static void Swap<T> (ref T a, ref T b)
{
  T temp = a;
  a = b;
  b = temp;
}
Swap<T> is called as follows:

int x = 5;
int y = 10;
Swap (ref x, ref y);
Generally, there is no need to supply type arguments to a generic method, because the compiler can implicitly infer the type. If there is ambiguity, generic methods can be called with type arguments as follows:

Swap<int> (ref x, ref y);
Within a generic type, a method is not classed as generic unless it introduces type parameters (with the angle bracket syntax). The Pop method in our generic stack merely uses the type’s existing type parameter, T, and is not classed as a generic method.

Methods and types are the only constructs that can introduce type parameters. Properties, indexers, events, fields, constructors, operators, and so on cannot declare type parameters, although they can partake in any type parameters already declared by their enclosing type. In our generic stack example, for instance, we could write an indexer that returns a generic item:

public T this [int index] => data [index];
Similarly, constructors can partake in existing type parameters but not introduce them:

public Stack<T>() { }   // Illegal
Declaring Type Parameters
Type parameters can be introduced in the declaration of classes, structs, interfaces, delegates (covered in Chapter 4), and methods. Other constructs, such as properties, cannot introduce a type parameter, but they can use one. For example, the property Value uses T:

public struct Nullable<T>
{
  public T Value { get; }
}
A generic type or method can have multiple parameters:

class Dictionary<TKey, TValue> {...}
To instantiate:

Dictionary<int,string> myDict = new Dictionary<int,string>();
Or:

var myDict = new Dictionary<int,string>();
Generic type names and method names can be overloaded as long as the number of type parameters is different. For example, the following three type names do not conflict:

class A        {}
class A<T>     {}
class A<T1,T2> {}
NOTE
By convention, generic types and methods with a single type parameter typically name their parameter T, as long as the intent of the parameter is clear. When using multiple type parameters, each parameter is prefixed with T but has a more descriptive name.

typeof and Unbound Generic Types
Open generic types do not exist at runtime: they are closed as part of compilation. However, it is possible for an unbound generic type to exist at runtime—purely as a Type object. The only way to specify an unbound generic type in C# is via the typeof operator:

class A<T> {}
class A<T1,T2> {}
...

Type a1 = typeof (A<>);   // Unbound type (notice no type arguments).
Type a2 = typeof (A<,>);  // Use commas to indicate multiple type args.
Open generic types are used in conjunction with the Reflection API (Chapter 18).

You can also use the typeof operator to specify a closed type:

Type a3 = typeof (A<int,int>);
Or, you can specify an open type (which is closed at runtime):

class B<T> { void X() { Type t = typeof (T); } }
The default Generic Value
You can use the default keyword to get the default value for a generic type parameter. The default value for a reference type is null, and the default value for a value type is the result of bitwise-zeroing the value type’s fields:

static void Zap<T> (T[] array)
{
  for (int i = 0; i < array.Length; i++)
    array[i] = default(T);
}
From C# 7.1, you can omit the type argument for cases in which the compiler is able to infer it. We could replace the last line of code with this:

    array[i] = default;
# Generic Constraints
By default, you can substitute a type parameter with any type whatsoever. Constraints can be applied to a type parameter to require more specific type arguments. These are the possible constraints:

where T : base-class   // Base-class constraint
where T : interface    // Interface constraint
where T : class        // Reference-type constraint
where T : class?       // (see "Nullable Reference Types" in Chapter 1)
where T : struct       // Value-type constraint (excludes Nullable types)
where T : unmanaged    // Unmanaged constraint
where T : new()        // Parameterless constructor constraint
where U : T            // Naked type constraint
where T : notnull      // Non-nullable value type, or (from C# 8)
                       // a non-nullable reference type
In the following example, GenericClass<T,U> requires T to derive from (or be identical to) SomeClass and implement Interface1, and requires U to provide a parameterless constructor:

class     SomeClass {}
interface Interface1 {}

class GenericClass<T,U> where T : SomeClass, Interface1
                        where U : new()
{...}
You can apply constraints wherever type parameters are defined, in both methods and type definitions.

A base-class constraint specifies that the type parameter must subclass (or match) a particular class; an interface constraint specifies that the type parameter must implement that interface. These constraints allow instances of the type parameter to be implicitly converted to that class or interface. For example, suppose that we want to write a generic Max method, which returns the maximum of two values. We can take advantage of the generic interface defined in the System namespace called IComparable<T>:

public interface IComparable<T>   // Simplified version of interface
{
  int CompareTo (T other);
}
CompareTo returns a positive number if this is greater than other. Using this interface as a constraint, we can write a Max method as follows (to avoid distraction, null checking is omitted):

static T Max <T> (T a, T b) where T : IComparable<T>
{
  return a.CompareTo (b) > 0 ? a : b;
}
The Max method can accept arguments of any type implementing IComparable<T> (which includes most built-in types such as int and string):

int z = Max (5, 10);               // 10
string last = Max ("ant", "zoo");  // zoo
The class constraint and struct constraint specify that T must be a reference type or (non-nullable) value type. A great example of the struct constraint is the System.Nullable<T> struct (we discuss this class in depth in “Nullable Value Types”):

struct Nullable<T> where T : struct {...}
The unmanaged constraint (introduced in C# 7.3) is a stronger version of a struct constraint: T must be a simple value type or a struct that is (recursively) free of any reference types.

The parameterless constructor constraint requires T to have a public parameterless constructor. If this constraint is defined, you can call new() on T:

static void Initialize<T> (T[] array) where T : new()
{
  for (int i = 0; i < array.Length; i++)
    array[i] = new T();
}
The naked type constraint requires one type parameter to derive from (or match) another type parameter. In this example, the method FilteredStack returns another Stack, containing only the subset of elements where the type parameter U is of the type parameter T:

class Stack<T>
{
  Stack<U> FilteredStack<U>() where U : T {...}
}
Subclassing Generic Types
A generic class can be subclassed just like a nongeneric class. The subclass can leave the base class’s type parameters open, as in the following example:

class Stack<T>                   {...}
class SpecialStack<T> : Stack<T> {...}
Or, the subclass can close the generic type parameters with a concrete type:

class IntStack : Stack<int>  {...}
A subtype can also introduce fresh type arguments:

class List<T>                     {...}
class KeyedList<T,TKey> : List<T> {...}
NOTE
Technically, all type arguments on a subtype are fresh: you could say that a subtype closes and then reopens the base type arguments. This means that a subclass can give new (and potentially more meaningful) names to the type arguments that it reopens:

class List<T> {...}
class KeyedList<TElement,TKey> : List<TElement> {...}
Self-Referencing Generic Declarations
A type can name itself as the concrete type when closing a type argument:

public interface IEquatable<T> { bool Equals (T obj); }

public class Balloon : IEquatable<Balloon>
{
  public string Color { get; set; }
  public int CC { get; set; }

  public bool Equals (Balloon b)
  {
    if (b == null) return false;
    return b.Color == Color && b.CC == CC;
  }
}
The following are also legal:

class Foo<T> where T : IComparable<T> { ... }
class Bar<T> where T : Bar<T> { ... }
# Static Data
Static data is unique for each closed type:

Console.WriteLine (++Bob<int>.Count);     // 1
Console.WriteLine (++Bob<int>.Count);     // 2
Console.WriteLine (++Bob<string>.Count);  // 1
Console.WriteLine (++Bob<object>.Count);  // 1

class Bob<T> { public static int Count; }

# Type Parameters and Conversions
C#’s cast operator can perform several kinds of conversion, including:

Numeric conversion

Reference conversion

Boxing/unboxing conversion

Custom conversion (via operator overloading; see Chapter 4)

The decision as to which kind of conversion will take place happens at compile time, based on the known types of the operands. This creates an interesting scenario with generic type parameters, because the precise operand types are unknown at compile time. If this leads to ambiguity, the compiler generates an error.

The most common scenario is when you want to perform a reference conversion:

StringBuilder Foo<T> (T arg)
{
  if (arg is StringBuilder)
    return (StringBuilder) arg;   // Will not compile
  ...
}
Without knowledge of T’s actual type, the compiler is concerned that you might have intended this to be a custom conversion. The simplest solution is to instead use the as operator, which is unambiguous because it cannot perform custom conversions:

StringBuilder Foo<T> (T arg)
{
  StringBuilder sb = arg as StringBuilder;
  if (sb != null) return sb;
  ...
}
A more general solution is to first cast to object. This works because conversions to/from object are assumed not to be custom conversions, but reference or boxing/unboxing conversions. In this case, StringBuilder is a reference type, so it must be a reference conversion:

  return (StringBuilder) (object) arg;
Unboxing conversions can also introduce ambiguities. The following could be an unboxing, numeric, or custom conversion:

int Foo<T> (T x) => (int) x;     // Compile-time error
The solution, again, is to first cast to object and then to int (which then unambiguously signals an unboxing conversion in this case):

int Foo<T> (T x) => (int) (object) x;

# Covariance
Assuming A is convertible to B, X has a covariant type parameter if X<A> is convertible to X<B>.

NOTE
With C#’s notion of covariance (and contravariance), “convertible” means convertible via an implicit reference conversion—such as A subclassing B, or A implementing B. Numeric conversions, boxing conversions, and custom conversions are not included.

For instance, type IFoo<T> has a covariant T if the following is legal:

IFoo<string> s = ...;
IFoo<object> b = s;
Interfaces permit covariant type parameters (as do delegates; see Chapter 4), but classes do not. Arrays also allow covariance (A[] can be converted to B[] if A has an implicit reference conversion to B) and are discussed here for comparison.

NOTE
Covariance and contravariance (or simply “variance”) are advanced concepts. The motivation behind introducing and enhancing variance in C# was to allow generic interface and generic types (in particular, those defined in .NET, such as IEnumerable<T>) to work more as you’d expect. You can benefit from this without understanding the details behind covariance and contravariance.

# Variance is not automatic
To ensure static type safety, type parameters are not automatically variant. Consider the following:

class Animal {}
class Bear : Animal {}
class Camel : Animal {}

public class Stack<T>   // A simple Stack implementation
{
  int position;
  T[] data = new T[100];
  public void Push (T obj)  => data[position++] = obj;
  public T Pop()            => data[--position]; 
}
The following fails to compile:

Stack<Bear> bears = new Stack<Bear>();
Stack<Animal> animals = bears;            // Compile-time error
That restriction prevents the possibility of runtime failure with the following code:

animals.Push (new Camel());      // Trying to add Camel to bears
Lack of covariance, however, can hinder reusability. Suppose, for instance, that we wanted to write a method to Wash a stack of animals:

public class ZooCleaner
{
  public static void Wash (Stack<Animal> animals) {...}
}
Calling Wash with a stack of bears would generate a compile-time error. One workaround is to redefine the Wash method with a constraint:

class ZooCleaner
{
  public static void Wash<T> (Stack<T> animals) where T : Animal { ... }
}
We can now call Wash as follows:

Stack<Bear> bears = new Stack<Bear>();
ZooCleaner.Wash (bears);
Another solution is to have Stack<T> implement an interface with a covariant type parameter, as you’ll see shortly.

# Arrays
For historical reasons, array types support covariance. This means that B[] can be cast to A[] if B subclasses A (and both are reference types):

Bear[] bears = new Bear[3];
Animal[] animals = bears;     // OK
The downside of this reusability is that element assignments can fail at runtime:

animals[0] = new Camel();     // Runtime error