# .NET offers a variety of classes in the System.Net.* namespaces for communicating via standard network protocols, such as HTTP and TCP/IP. Here’s a summary of the key components:
• HttpClient for consuming HTTP web APIs and RESTful services
• HttpListener for writing an HTTP server
• SmtpClient for constructing and sending mail messages via SMTP
• Dns for converting between domain names and addresses
• TcpClient, UdpClient, TcpListener, and Socket classes for direct access to the transport and network layers
The .NET types in this chapter are in the System.Net.* and System.IO namespaces.
.NET also provides client-side support for FTP, but only through classes that have been marked as obsolete from .NET 6. If you need to use FTP, your best option is to reach for a NuGet library such as FluentFTP.

# Network Architecture
Most types reside in the `transport layer or application layer`. 
  - The `transport layer` defines basic protocols for `sending and receiving bytes (TCP and UDP)`
    - TcpListener
    - TcpClient
    - UdpClient
  - The `application layer` defines higher-level protocols designed for specific applications such as retrieving `web pages (HTTP), sending mail (SMTP), and converting between domain names and IP addresses (DNS).`
    - HttpClient
    - HttpMessageHandler
    - HttpListener
    - SmtpClient
    - Dns
    - Ping
  - Network and link layers
    - IP Address
    - Physical MAC address

- It’s usually most convenient to program at the application layer; however, there are a couple of reasons why you might want to work directly at the transport layer. One is if you need an application protocol not provided in .NET, such as POP3 for retrieving mail. Another is if you want to invent a custom protocol for a special application such as a peer-to-peer client.
- Of the application protocols, HTTP is special in its applicability to general-purpose communication. Its basic mode of operation—“give me the web page with this URL” —adapts nicely to “get me the result of calling this endpoint with these arguments.” (In addition to the “get” verb, there is “put,” “post,” and “delete,” allowing for REST-based services.)
- `HTTP` also has a rich set of features that are useful in multitier business applica‐ tions and service-oriented architectures, such as protocols for authentication and encryption, message chunking, extensible headers and cookies, and the ability to have many server applications share a single port and IP address. For these reasons, HTTP is well supported in .NET—both directly, as described in this chapter, and at a higher level, through such technologies as Web API and ASP.NET Core.

# Network acronyms
Acronym Expansion
- `DNS`: converts between domain names (e.g., ebay.com) and IP addresses (e.g., 199.54.213.2)
- `FTP`: Internet-based protocol for sending and receiving files
- `HTTP` Hypertext Transfer Protocol IIS Internet Information Services IP Internet Protocol, Retrieves web pages and runs web services
- `LAN` Local Area Network
- `POP` Post Office Protocol
- `REST` REpresentational StateTransfer
- `SMTP` Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
- `TCP` Transmission and Control Protocol
- `UDP` Universal Datagram Protocol
- `UNC` Universal Naming Convention
- `URI` Uniform Resource Identifier Ubiquitous resource naming system (e.g., http://www.amazon.com
or mailto:joe@bloggs.org)
- `URL` Uniform Resource Locator, Technical meaning (fading from use): subset of URI; popular
meaning: synonym of URI

# Addresses and Ports
`IP4`: Currently the dominant addressing system; IPv4 addresses are 32 bits wide. When string-formatted, IPv4 addresses are written as four dot-separated deci‐ mals (e.g., 101.102.103.104). An address can be unique in the world—or unique within a particular subnet (such as on a corporate network).
`IP6`: The newer 128-bit addressing system. Addresses are string-formatted in hexadecimal with a colon separator (e.g., [3EA0:FFFF:198A:E4A3: 4FF2:54fA:41BC:8D31]). .NET requires that you add square brackets around the address.

The IPAddress class in the System.Net namespace represents an address in either protocol. It has a constructor accepting a byte array, and a static Parse method accepting a correctly formatted string:
```c#
    IPAddress a1 = new IPAddress (new byte[] { 101, 102, 103, 104 });
    IPAddress a2 = IPAddress.Parse ("101.102.103.104");
    Console.WriteLine (a1.Equals (a2));                     // True
Console.WriteLine (a1.AddressFamily);                   // InterNetwork
    IPAddress a3 = IPAddress.Parse
      ("[3EA0:FFFF:198A:E4A3:4FF2:54fA:41BC:8D31]");
    Console.WriteLine (a3.AddressFamily);   // InterNetworkV6
```

The TCP and UDP protocols break out each IP address into 65,535 ports, allowing a computer on a single address to run multiple applications, each on its own port. Many applications have standard default port assignments; for instance, HTTP uses port 80; SMTP uses port 25.

`The TCP and UDP ports from 49152 to 65535` are officially unassigned, so they are good for testing and small-scale deployments.

An IP address and port combination is represented in .NET by the IPEndPoint class:
    IPAddress a = IPAddress.Parse ("101.102.103.104");
    IPEndPoint ep = new IPEndPoint (a, 222);           // Port 222
    Console.WriteLine (ep.ToString());                 // 101.102.103.104:222


`Firewalls` block ports. In many corporate environments, `only a few ports are open—typically, port 80 (for unencrypted HTTP) and port 443 (for secure HTTP).`

# URIs

A `URI` is a specially formatted string that describes a resource on the internet or a LAN, such as a web page, file, or email address. Examples include http:// www.ietf.org, ftp://myisp/doc.txt, and mailto:joe@bloggs.com. The exact formatting is defined by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

A ``URI` can be broken up into a series of elements—typically, scheme, authority, and path. The Uri class in the System namespace performs just this division, exposing a property for each element, as illustrated in Figure 16-2.

```
https://domain.com:999/info/page.html?query#top
```
- Scheme: Https
- Host: domain.com
- Port:999
- AbsolutePath: /info/page.html
- Query: query
- Fragment: top

The Uri class is useful when you need to validate the format of a URI string or to split a URI into its component parts. Otherwise, you can treat a URI simply as a string—most net‐ working methods are overloaded to accept either a Uri object or a string.

You can construct a Uri object by passing any of the following strings into its constructor:
• A URI string, such as http://www.ebay.com or file://janespc/sharedpics/dol‐ phin.jpg
• An absolute path to a file on your hard disk, such as c:\myfiles\data.xlsx or, on Unix, /tmp/myfiles/data.xlsx
• A UNC path to a file on the LAN, such as \\janespc\sharedpics\dolphin.jpg

File and UNC paths are automatically converted to URIs: the “file:” protocol is added, and backslashes are converted to forward slashes. The Uri constructors also perform some basic cleanup on your string before creating the Uri, including converting the scheme and hostname to lowercase and removing default and blank port numbers. If you supply a URI string without the scheme, such as www.test.com, a UriFormatException is thrown.

`Uri` has an IsLoopback property, which indicates whether the Uri references the local host (IP address 127.0.0.1), and an IsFile property, which indicates whether the Uri references a local or UNC (IsUnc) path (IsUnc reports false for a Samba share mounted in a Linux filesystem). If IsFile returns true, the LocalPath prop‐ erty returns a version of AbsolutePath that is friendly to the local OS (with slashes or backslashes as appropriate to the OS), on which you can call File.Open.

Instances of Uri have read-only properties. To modify an existing Uri, instantiate a UriBuilder object—this has writable properties and can be converted back via its Uri property.
Uri also provides methods for comparing and subtracting paths:
```c#
    Uri info = new Uri ("http://www.domain.com:80/info/");
    Uri page = new Uri ("http://www.domain.com/info/page.html");
 
Console.WriteLine (info.Host);
Console.WriteLine (info.Port);
Console.WriteLine (page.Port);
// www.domain.com
// 80
// 80  (Uri knows the default HTTP port)
Console.WriteLine (info.IsBaseOf (page));
Uri relative = info.MakeRelativeUri (page);
Console.WriteLine (relative.IsAbsoluteUri);
Console.WriteLine (relative.ToString());
// True
// False
// page.html

```

A relative Uri, such as page.html in this example, will throw an exception if you call almost any property or method other than IsAbsoluteUri and ToString(). You can directly instantiate a relative Uri, as follows:
```c#
    Uri u = new Uri ("page.html", UriKind.Relative);
```

`A trailing slash` is significant in a URI and makes a difference as to how a server processes a request if a path component is present.
In a traditional web server, for instance, given the URI http:// www.albahari.com/nutshell/, you can expect an HTTP web server to look in the nutshell subdirectory in the site’s web folder and return the default document (usually index.html).
Without the trailing slash, the web server will instead look for a file called nutshell (without an extension) directly in the site’s root folder—which is usually not what you want. If no such file exists, most web servers will assume the user mistyped and will return a 301 Permanent Redirect error, suggesting the client retry with the trailing slash. A .NET HTTP client, by default, will respond transparently to a 301 in the same way as a web browser—by retrying with the suggested URI. This means that if you omit a trailing slash when it should have been included, your request will still work—but will suffer an unnecessary extra round trip.

The Uri class also provides static helper methods such as `EscapeUriString`(), which converts a string to a valid URL by converting all characters with an ASCII value greater than 127 to hexadecimal representation. The CheckHostName() and CheckSchemeName() methods accept a string and check whether it is syntactically valid for the given property (although they do not attempt to determine whether a host or URI exists).