# HttpClient
The HttpClient class exposes a modern API for HTTP client operations, replacing the old WebClient and WebRequest/WebResponse types (which have since been marked as obsolete).
HttpClient was written in response to the growth of HTTP-based web APIs and REST services, and provides a good experience when dealing with protocols more elaborate than simply fetching a web page. In particular:
• A single HttpClient instance can handle concurrent requests and plays well with features such as custom headers, cookies, and authentication schemes.
• HttpClient lets you write and plug in custom message handlers. This enables mocking in unit tests, and the creation of custom pipelines (for logging, com‐ pression, encryption, and so on).
 HttpClient has a rich and extensible type system for headers and content.

 The simplest way to use HttpClient is to instantiate it and then call one of its Get* methods, passing in a URI:
string html = await new HttpClient().GetStringAsync ("http://linqpad.net"); (There’s also GetByteArrayAsync and GetStreamAsync.) All I/O-bound methods in
HttpClient are asynchronous.
Unlike its WebRequest/WebResponse predecessors, to get the best performance with HttpClient, you must reuse the same instance (otherwise things such as DNS resolution can be unnecessarily repeated and sockets are held open longer than necessary). HttpClient permits concurrent operations, so the following is legal and downloads two web pages at once:
var client = new HttpClient();
var task1 = client.GetStringAsync ("http://www.linqpad.net"); var task2 = client.GetStringAsync ("http://www.albahari.com"); Console.WriteLine (await task1);
Console.WriteLine (await task2);
HttpClient has a Timeout property and a BaseAddress property, which prefixes a URI to every request. HttpClient is somewhat of a thin shell: most of the other properties that you might expect to find here are defined in another class called HttpClientHandler. To access this class, you instantiate it and then pass the instance into HttpClient’s constructor:
var handler = new HttpClientHandler { UseProxy = false }; var client = new HttpClient (handler);
...
In this example, we told the handler to disable proxy support, which can sometimes improve performance by avoiding the cost of automatic proxy detection. There are also properties to control cookies, automatic redirection, authentication, and so on (we describe these in the following sections).

# GetAsync and Response Messages
The GetStringAsync, GetByteArrayAsync, and GetStreamAsync methods are con‐ venient shortcuts for calling the more general GetAsync method, which returns a response message:
var client = new HttpClient();
// The GetAsync method also accepts a CancellationToken. HttpResponseMessage response = await client.GetAsync ("http://...");
 
Response.EnsureSuccessStatusCode();
    string html = await response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
HttpResponseMessage exposes properties for accessing the headers (see “Headers” on page 729) and the HTTP StatusCode. An unsuccessful status code such as 404 (not found) doesn’t cause an exception to be thrown unless you explicitly call EnsureSuccessStatusCode. Communication or DNS errors, however, do throw exceptions.
HttpContent has a CopyToAsync method for writing to another stream, which is useful in writing the output to a file:
    using (var fileStream = File.Create ("linqpad.html"))
      await response.Content.CopyToAsync (fileStream);
GetAsync is one of four methods corresponding to HTTP’s four verbs (the others are PostAsync, PutAsync, and DeleteAsync). We demonstrate PostAsync later in “Uploading Form Data” on page 730.

# SendAsync and Request Messages
GetAsync, PostAsync, PutAsync, and DeleteAsync are all shortcuts for calling Send Async, the single low-level method into which everything else feeds. To use this, you first construct an HttpRequestMessage:
    var client = new HttpClient();
    var request = new HttpRequestMessage (HttpMethod.Get, "http://...");
    HttpResponseMessage response = await client.SendAsync (request);
    response.EnsureSuccessStatusCode();
    ...
Instantiating a HttpRequestMessage object means that you can customize proper‐ ties of the request, such as the headers (see “Headers” on page 729) and the content itself, allowing you to upload data.
Uploading Data and HttpContent
After instantiating a HttpRequestMessage object, you can upload content by assign‐ ing its Content property. The type for this property is an abstract class called HttpContent. .NET includes the following concrete subclasses for different kinds of content (you can also write your own):
• ByteArrayContent
• StringContent
• FormUrlEncodedContent (see “Uploading Form Data” on page 730) • StreamContent

# HttpMessageHandler
We said previously that most of the properties for customizing requests are defined not in HttpClient but in HttpClientHandler. The latter is actually a subclass of the abstract HttpMessageHandler class, defined as follows:
    public abstract class HttpMessageHandler : IDisposable
    {
      protected internal abstract Task<HttpResponseMessage> SendAsync
        (HttpRequestMessage request, CancellationToken cancellationToken);
      public void Dispose();
      protected virtual void Dispose (bool disposing);
    }
The SendAsync method is called from HttpClient’s SendAsync method. HttpMessageHandler is simple enough to subclass easily and offers an extensibility
point into HttpClient. Unit testing and mocking
We can subclass HttpMessageHandler to create a mocking handler to assist with unit testing:
    class MockHandler : HttpMessageHandler
    {
      Func <HttpRequestMessage, HttpResponseMessage> _responseGenerator;
      public MockHandler
        (Func <HttpRequestMessage, HttpResponseMessage> responseGenerator)
      {
        _responseGenerator = responseGenerator;
}
      protected override Task <HttpResponseMessage> SendAsync
        (HttpRequestMessage request, CancellationToken cancellationToken)
      {
        cancellationToken.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();
        var response = _responseGenerator (request);
        response.RequestMessage = request;
        return Task.FromResult (response);
} }