# Authentication
You can supply a username and password to an HttpClient as follows: string username = "myuser";
    string password = "mypassword";
    var handler = new HttpClientHandler();
handler.Credentials = new NetworkCredential (username, password); var client = new HttpClient (handler);
...
This works with dialog-based authentication protocols, such as Basic and Digest, and is extensible through the AuthenticationManager class. It also supports Win‐ dows NTLM and Kerberos (if you include a domain name when constructing the NetworkCredential object). If you want to use the currently authenticated

Windows user, you can leave the Credentials property null and instead set Use DefaultCredentials to true.
When you provide credentials, HttpClient automatically negotiates a compatible protocol. In some cases, there can be a choice: if you examine the initial response from a Microsoft Exchange server web mail page, for instance, it might contain the following headers:
    HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
    Content-Length: 83
    Content-Type: text/html
    Server: Microsoft-IIS/6.0
    WWW-Authenticate: Negotiate
    WWW-Authenticate: NTLM
    WWW-Authenticate: Basic realm="exchange.somedomain.com"
    X-Powered-By: ASP.NET
    Date: Sat, 05 Aug 2006 12:37:23 GMT
The 401 code signals that authorization is required; the “WWW-Authenticate” headers indicate what authentication protocols are understood. If you configure the HttpClientHandler with the correct username and password, however, this message will be hidden from you because the runtime responds automatically by choosing a compatible authentication protocol, and then resubmitting the original request with an extra header. Here’s an example:
    Authorization: Negotiate TlRMTVNTUAAABAAAt5II2gjACDArAAACAwACACgAAAAQ
    ATmKAAAAD0lVDRdPUksHUq9VUA==
This mechanism provides transparency, but generates an extra round trip with each request. You can avoid the extra round trips on subsequent requests to the same URI by setting the PreAuthenticate property on the HttpClientHandler to true.

# CredentialCache
You can force a particular authentication protocol with a CredentialCache object. A credential cache contains one or more NetworkCredential objects, each keyed to a particular protocol and URI prefix. For example, you might want to avoid the Basic protocol when logging into an Exchange Server because it transmits passwords in plain text:
```c#
    CredentialCache cache = new CredentialCache();
    Uri prefix = new Uri ("http://exchange.somedomain.com");
    cache.Add (prefix, "Digest",  new NetworkCredential ("joe", "passwd"));
    cache.Add (prefix, "Negotiate", new NetworkCredential ("joe", "passwd"));
    var handler = new HttpClientHandler();
    handler.Credentials = cache;
    ...
```
An authentication protocol is specified as a string. The valid values include:
    Basic, Digest, NTLM, Kerberos, Negotiate

In this particular situation it will choose Negotiate, because the server didn’t indi‐ cate that it supported Digest in its authentication headers. Negotiate is a Windows protocol that currently boils down to either Kerberos or NTLM, depending on the capabilities of the server, but ensures forward compatibility of your application when future security standards are deployed.
The static CredentialCache.DefaultNetworkCredentials property allows you to add the currently authenticated Windows user to the credential cache without having to specify a password:
    cache.Add (prefix, "Negotiate", CredentialCache.DefaultNetworkCredentials);

# Cookies

A cookie is a name/value string pair that an HTTP server sends to a client in a response header. A web browser client typically remembers cookies and replays them to the server in each subsequent request (to the same address) until their expiry. A cookie allows a server to know whether it’s talking to the same client it was a minute ago—or yesterday—without needing a messy query string in the URI.
By default, HttpClient ignores any cookies received from the server. To accept cookies, create a CookieContainer object and assign it an HttpClientHandler:
var cc = new CookieContainer();
var handler = new HttpClientHandler(); handler.CookieContainer = cc;
var client = new HttpClient (handler); ...
To replay the received cookies in future requests, simply use the same CookieCon tainer object again. Alternatively, you can start with a fresh CookieContainer and then add cookies manually, as follows:  

Cookie c = new Cookie ("PREF",
                           "ID=6b10df1da493a9c4:TM=1179...",
"/",
                           ".google.com");
    freshCookieContainer.Add (c);
The third and fourth arguments indicate the path and domain of the originator. A CookieContainer on the client can house cookies from many different places; HttpClient sends only those cookies whose path and domain match those of the server.