# Using TCP
TCP and UDP constitute the transport layer protocols on top of which most inter‐ net—and LAN—services are built. HTTP (version 2 and below), FTP, and SMTP use TCP; DNS and HTTP version 3 use UDP. TCP is connection-oriented and includes reliability mechanisms; UDP is connectionless, has a lower overhead, and supports broadcasting. BitTorrent uses UDP, as does Voice over IP (VoIP).

The transport layer offers greater flexibility—and potentially improved perfor‐ mance—over the higher layers, but it requires that you handle such tasks as authen‐ tication and encryption yourself.
With TCP in .NET, you have a choice of either the easier-to-use TcpClient and TcpListener façade classes, or the feature-rich Socket class. (In fact, you can mix and match, because TcpClient exposes the underlying Socket object through the Client property.) The Socket class exposes more configuration options and allows direct access to the network layer (IP) and non-internet-based protocols such as Novell’s SPX/IPX.
As with other protocols, TCP differentiates a client and server: the client initiates a request, while the server waits for a request. Here’s the basic structure for a synchronous TCP client request:
    using (TcpClient client = new TcpClient())
    {
      client.Connect ("address", port);
      using (NetworkStream n = client.GetStream())
      {
        // Read and write to the network stream...
      }
}
TcpClient’s Connect method blocks until a connection is established (Connect Async is the asynchronous equivalent). The NetworkStream then provides a means of two-way communication, for both transmitting and receiving bytes of data from a server.
A simple TCP server looks like this:
TcpListener listener = new TcpListener (<ip address>, port); listener.Start();
while (keepProcessingRequests)
using (TcpClient c = listener.AcceptTcpClient()) using (NetworkStream n = c.GetStream())
{
        // Read and write to the network stream...
      }
    listener.Stop();
TcpListener requires the local IP address on which to listen (a computer with two network cards, for instance, can have two addresses). You can use IPAddress.Any to instruct it to listen on all (or the only) local IP addresses. AcceptTcpClient blocks until a client request is received (again, there’s also an asynchronous version), at which point we call GetStream, just as on the client side.
When working at the transport layer, you need to decide on a protocol for who talks when and for how long—rather like with a walkie-talkie. If both parties talk or listen at the same time, communication breaks down!

Let’s invent a protocol in which the client speaks first, saying “Hello,” and then the server responds by saying “Hello right back!” Here’s the code:
using System;
using System.IO;
using System.Net;
using System.Net.Sockets; using System.Threading;
new Thread (Server).Start();
Thread.Sleep (500);
Client();
void Client()
{
// Run server method concurrently.
// Give server time to start.
  using (TcpClient client = new TcpClient ("localhost", 51111))
  using (NetworkStream n = client.GetStream())
  {
    BinaryWriter w = new BinaryWriter (n);
    w.Write ("Hello");
    w.Flush();
    Console.WriteLine (new BinaryReader (n).ReadString());
} }
void Server()     // Handles a single client request, then exits.
{
TcpListener listener = new TcpListener (IPAddress.Any, 51111); listener.Start();
using (TcpClient c = listener.AcceptTcpClient())
using (NetworkStream n = c.GetStream())
  {
    string msg = new BinaryReader (n).ReadString();
  BinaryWriter w
  w.Write (msg +
  w.Flush();
}
= new BinaryWriter (n); " right back!");
  listener.Stop();
}
// OUTPUT: Hello right back!
// Must call Flush because we're not
// disposing the writer.
In this example, we’re using the localhost loopback to run the client and server on the same machine. We’ve arbitrarily chosen a port in the unallocated range (above 49152) and used a BinaryWriter and BinaryReader to encode the text messages. We’ve avoided closing or disposing the readers and writers in order to keep the underlying NetworkStream open until our conversation completes.
BinaryReader and BinaryWriter might seem like odd choices for reading and writ‐ ing strings. However, they have a major advantage over StreamReader and Stream Writer: they prefix strings with an integer indicating the length, so a BinaryReader always knows exactly how many bytes to read. If you call StreamReader.ReadToEnd, you might block indefinitely—because a NetworkStream doesn’t have an end! As

# Concurrency with TCP
TcpClient and TcpListener offer task-based asynchronous methods for scalable concurrency. Using these is simply a question of replacing blocking method calls with their *Async versions and awaiting the task that’s returned.
In the following example, we write an asynchronous TCP server that accepts requests of 5,000 bytes in length, reverses the bytes, and then sends them back to the client:
    async void RunServerAsync ()
    {
      var listener = new TcpListener (IPAddress.Any, 51111);
      listener.Start ();
      try
      {
        while (true)
          Accept (await listener.AcceptTcpClientAsync ());
}
      finally { listener.Stop(); }
    }
    async Task Accept (TcpClient client)
    {
      await Task.Yield ();
      try
      {
        using (client)
        using (NetworkStream n = client.GetStream ())
        {
          byte[] data = new byte [5000];
          int bytesRead = 0; int chunkSize = 1;
          while (bytesRead < data.Length && chunkSize > 0)
bytesRead += chunkSize =
await n.ReadAsync (data, bytesRead, data.Length - bytesRead);
          Array.Reverse (data);   // Reverse the byte sequence
          await n.WriteAsync (data, 0, data.Length);
        }
}
   catch (Exception ex) { Console.WriteLine (ex.Message); }
    }
Such a program is scalable in that it does not block a thread for the duration of a request. So, if 1,000 clients were to connect at once over a slow network connection (so that each request took several seconds from start to finish, for example), this program would not require 1,000 threads for that time (unlike with a synchronous solution). Instead, it leases threads only for the small periods of time required to execute code before and after the await expressions.

# Receiving POP3 Mail with TCP
.NET provides no application-layer support for POP3, so you need to write at the TCP layer in order to receive mail from a POP3 server. Fortunately, this is a simple protocol; a POP3 conversation goes like this:

Each command and response is terminated by a new line (CR + LF) except for the multiline LIST and RETR commands, which are terminated by a single dot on a separate line. Because we can’t use StreamReader with NetworkStream, we can start by writing a helper method to read a line of text in a nonbuffered fashion:
string ReadLine (Stream s) {
List<byte> lineBuffer = new List<byte>(); while (true)
{
        int b = s.ReadByte();
        if (b == 10 || b < 0) break;
        if (b != 13) lineBuffer.Add ((byte)b);
}
      return Encoding.UTF8.GetString (lineBuffer.ToArray());
    }

We also need a helper method to send a command. Because we always expect to receive a response starting with +OK, we can read and validate the response at the same time:
void SendCommand (Stream stream, string line) {
byte[] data = Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes (line + "\r\n"); stream.Write (data, 0, data.Length);
string response = ReadLine (stream);
if (!response.StartsWith ("+OK"))
        throw new Exception ("POP Error: " + response);
    }
With these methods written, the job of retrieving mail is easy. We establish a TCP connection on port 110 (the default POP3 port) and then start talking to the server. In this example, we write each mail message to a randomly named file with an .eml extension, before deleting the message off the server:
using (TcpClient client = new TcpClient ("mail.isp.com", 110)) using (NetworkStream n = client.GetStream())
{
ReadLine (n);
SendCommand (n, "USER username"); SendCommand (n, "PASS password"); SendCommand (n, "LIST");
List<int> messageIDs = new List<int>(); while (true)
{
  string line = ReadLine (n);
  if (line == ".") break;
  messageIDs.Add (int.Parse (line.Split (' ')[0] ));   // Message ID
}
foreach (int id in messageIDs)         // Retrieve each message.
{
SendCommand (n, "RETR " + id);
string randomFile = Guid.NewGuid().ToString() + ".eml"; using (StreamWriter writer = File.CreateText (randomFile))
      while (true)
      {
        string line = ReadLine (n);
        if (line == ".") break;
        if (line == "..") line = ".";
        writer.WriteLine (line);
      }
    SendCommand (n, "DELE " + id);
  SendCommand (n, "QUIT");
}