# Order Comparison
As well as defining standard protocols for equality, C# and .NET define two standard protocols for determining the order of one object relative to another:

The IComparable interfaces (IComparable and IComparable<T>)

The > and < operators

The IComparable interfaces are used by general-purpose sorting algorithms. In the following example, the static Array.Sort method works because System.String implements the IComparable interfaces:

string[] colors = { "Green", "Red", "Blue" };
Array.Sort (colors);
foreach (string c in colors) Console.Write (c + " ");   // Blue Green Red
The < and > operators are more specialized, and they are intended mostly for numeric types. Because they are statically resolved, they can translate to highly efficient bytecode, suitable for computationally intensive algorithms.

# IComparable
The IComparable interfaces are defined as follows:

public interface IComparable       { int CompareTo (object other); }
public interface IComparable<in T> { int CompareTo (T other);      }
The two interfaces represent the same functionality. With value types, the generic type-safe interface is faster than the nongeneric interface. In both cases, the Compare​To method works as follows:

If a comes after b, a.CompareTo(b) returns a positive number.

If a is the same as b, a.CompareTo(b) returns 0.

If a comes before b, a.CompareTo(b) returns a negative number.

For example:

Console.WriteLine ("Beck".CompareTo ("Anne"));       // 1
Console.WriteLine ("Beck".CompareTo ("Beck"));       // 0
Console.WriteLine ("Beck".CompareTo ("Chris"));      // -1
Most of the base types implement both IComparable interfaces. These interfaces are also sometimes implemented when writing custom types. We provide an example shortly.

# IComparable versus Equals
Consider a type that both overrides Equals and implements the IComparable interfaces. You’d expect that when Equals returns true, CompareTo should return 0. And you’d be right. But here’s the catch:

When Equals returns false, CompareTo can return what it likes (as long as it’s internally consistent)!

In other words, equality can be “fussier” than comparison, but not vice versa (violate this and sorting algorithms will break). So, CompareTo can say, “All objects are equal,” whereas Equals says, “But some are more equal than others!”

A great example of this is System.String. String’s Equals method and == operator use ordinal comparison, which compares the Unicode point values of each character. Its CompareTo method, however, uses a less fussy culture-dependent comparison. On most computers, for instance, the strings “ṻ” and “ǖ” are different according to Equals but the same according to CompareTo.

In Chapter 7, we discuss the pluggable ordering protocol, IComparer, which allows you to specify an alternative ordering algorithm when sorting or instantiating a sorted collection. A custom IComparer can further extend the gap between CompareTo and Equals—a case-insensitive string comparer, for instance, will return 0 when comparing "A" and "a". The reverse rule still applies, however: CompareTo can never be fussier than Equals.
Note: 
When implementing the IComparable interfaces in a custom type, you can avoid running afoul of this rule by writing the first line of CompareTo as follows:

if (Equals (other)) return 0;
After that, it can return what it likes, as long as it’s consistent!

# < and >
Some types define < and > operators. For instance:

bool after2010 = DateTime.Now > new DateTime (2010, 1, 1);
You can expect the < and > operators, when implemented, to be functionally consistent with the IComparable interfaces. This is standard practice across .NET.

It’s also standard practice to implement the IComparable interfaces whenever < and > are overloaded, although the reverse is not true. In fact, most .NET types that implement IComparable do not overload < and >. This differs from the situation with equality for which it’s normal to overload == when overriding Equals.

Typically, > and < are overloaded only when:

A type has a strong intrinsic concept of “greater than” and “less than” (versus IComparable’s broader concepts of “comes before” and “comes after”).

There is only one way, or context, in which to perform the comparison.

The result is invariant across cultures.

System.String doesn’t satisfy the last point: the results of string comparisons can vary according to language. Hence, string doesn’t support the > and < operators:

bool error = "Beck" > "Anne";       // Compile-time error
Implementing the IComparable Interfaces
In the following struct representing a musical note, we implement the IComparable interfaces as well as overloading the < and > operators. For completeness, we also override Equals/GetHashCode and overload == and !=:

public struct Note : IComparable<Note>, IEquatable<Note>, IComparable
{
  int _semitonesFromA;
  public int SemitonesFromA { get { return _semitonesFromA; } }

  public Note (int semitonesFromA)
  {
    _semitonesFromA = semitonesFromA;
  }

  public int CompareTo (Note other)            // Generic IComparable<T>
  {
    if (Equals (other)) return 0;    // Fail-safe check
    return _semitonesFromA.CompareTo (other._semitonesFromA);
  }

  int IComparable.CompareTo (object other)     // Nongeneric IComparable
  {
    if (!(other is Note))
      throw new InvalidOperationException ("CompareTo: Not a note");
    return CompareTo ((Note) other);
  }

  public static bool operator < (Note n1, Note n2)
     => n1.CompareTo (n2) < 0;

  public static bool operator > (Note n1, Note n2)
    => n1.CompareTo (n2) > 0;

  public bool Equals (Note other)    // for IEquatable<Note>
    => _semitonesFromA == other._semitonesFromA;

  public override bool Equals (object other)
  {
    if (!(other is Note)) return false;
    return Equals ((Note) other);
  }

  public override int GetHashCode() => _semitonesFromA.GetHashCode();

  public static bool operator == (Note n1, Note n2) => n1.Equals (n2);

  public static bool operator != (Note n1, Note n2) => !(n1 == n2);
}