# Application Layers
User interface (UI)–based applications can be divided into two categories: thin client, which amounts to a website, and rich client, which is a program the end user must download and install on a computer or mobile device.

For writing thin-client applications in C#, there’s ASP.NET Core, which runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS. ASP.NET Core is also designed for writing web APIs.

# ASP.NET Core
ASP.NET Core is a lightweight modular successor to ASP.NET and is suitable for creating web sites, REST-based web APIs, and microservices. It can also run in conjunction with two popular single-page-application frameworks: React and Angular.

ASP.NET supports the popular Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern, as well as a newer technology called Blazor, where client-side code is written in C# instead of JavaScript.

ASP.NET Core runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS and can self-host in a custom process. Unlike its .NET Framework predecessor (ASP.NET), ASP.NET Core is not dependent on System.Web and the historical baggage of web forms.

As with any thin-client architecture, ASP.NET Core offers the following general advantages over rich clients:

There is zero deployment at the client end.

The client can run on any platform that supports a web browser.

Updates are easily deployed.

# Windows Desktop
The Windows Desktop application layer offers a choice of two UI APIs for writing rich-client applications: WPF and Windows Forms. Both APIs run on Windows Desktop/Server 7 through 11.

# WPF
WPF was introduced in 2006 and has been enhanced ever since. Unlike its predecessor, Windows Forms, WPF explicitly renders controls using DirectX, with the following benefits:

It supports sophisticated graphics, such as arbitrary transformations, 3D rendering, multimedia, and true transparency. Skinning is supported through styles and templates.

Its primary measurement unit is not pixel based, so applications display correctly at any DPI setting.

It has extensive and flexible layout support, which means that you can localize an application without danger of elements overlapping.

Its use of DirectX makes rendering fast and able to take advantage of graphics hardware acceleration.

It offers reliable data binding.

UIs can be described declaratively in XAML files that can be maintained independent of the “code-behind” files—this helps to separate appearance from functionality.

WPF takes some time to learn due to its size and complexity. The types for writing WPF applications are in the System.Windows namespace and all subnamespaces except for System.Windows.Forms.

# Windows Forms
Windows Forms is a rich-client API that shipped with the first version of .NET Framework in 2000. Compared to WPF, Windows Forms is a relatively simple technology that provides most of the features you need for writing a typical Windows application. It also has significant relevancy in maintaining legacy applications. But compared to WPF, it has numerous drawbacks, most of which stem from it being a wrapper over GDI+ and the Win32 control library:

Although it provides mechanisms for DPI-awareness, it’s still too easy to write applications that break on clients whose DPI settings differ from the developer’s.

The API for drawing nonstandard controls is GDI+, which, although reasonably flexible, is slow in rendering large areas (and without double buffering, might flicker).

Controls lack true transparency.

Most controls are noncompositional. For instance, you can’t put an image control inside a tab control header. Customizing list views, combo boxes, and tab controls in a way that would be trivial with WPF is time consuming and painful in Windows Forms.

Dynamic layout is difficult to correctly implement reliably.

The last point is an excellent reason to favor WPF over Windows Forms—even if you’re writing a business application that needs just a UI and not a “user experience.” The layout elements in WPF, such as Grid, make it easy to assemble labels and text boxes such that they always align—even after language-changing localization—without messy logic and without any flickering. Further, you don’t need to bow to the lowest common denominator in screen resolution—WPF layout elements have been designed from the outset to adapt properly to resizing.

On the positive side, Windows Forms is relatively simple to learn and still has a good number of third-party controls.

The Windows Forms types are in the System.Windows.Forms (in System.Windows.Forms.dll) and System.Drawing (in System.Drawing.dll) namespaces. The latter also contains the GDI+ types for drawing custom controls.

# UWP and WinUI 3
UWP is a rich-client API for writing touch-first UIs that target Windows 10+ desktop and devices. The word “Universal” refers to its ability to run on a range of Windows 10 devices, including Xbox, Surface Hub, and HoloLens. However, it’s not compatible with earlier versions of Windows, including Windows 7 and Windows 8/8.1.

The UWP API uses XAML and is somewhat similar to WPF. Here are its key differences:

The primary mode of distribution for UWP apps is the Windows Store.

UWP apps run in a sandbox to lessen the threat of malware, which means that they cannot perform tasks such as reading or writing arbitrary files, and they cannot run with administrative elevation.

UWP relies on WinRT types that are part of the operating system (Windows), not the managed runtime. This means that when writing apps, you must nominate a Windows version range (such as Windows 10 build 17763 to Windows 10 build 18362). This means that you either need to target an old API or require that your customers install the latest Windows update.

Because of the limitations created by these differences, UWP never succeeded in matching the popularity of WPF and Windows Forms. To address this, Microsoft has introduced a new technology to supersede UWP called Windows App SDK (with a UI layer called WinUI 3).

The Windows App SDK transfers the WinRT APIs from the operating system to the runtime, thereby exposing a fully managed interface and removing the necessity to target a specific operating system version range. It also does the following:

Integrates better with the Windows Desktop APIs (Windows Forms and WPF)

Allows you to write applications that run outside the Windows Store sandbox

Runs atop the latest .NET (instead of being tied to .NET Core 2.2, as is the case with UWP)

The Windows App SDK, however, does not support Xbox or HoloLens at the time of writing.

# MAUI
MAUI (early 2022) is the new incarnation of Xamarin, and lets you develop mobile apps in C# that target iOS and Android (as well as cross-platform desktop apps that target macOS and Windows).

The CLR/BCL that runs on iOS and Android is called Mono (a derivation of the open-source Mono runtime). Historically, Mono hasn’t been fully compatible with .NET, and libraries that ran on both Mono and .NET would target .NET Standard. With MAUI, Mono’s public interface has merged with .NET 6, making Mono, in effect, an implementation of .NET 6.

Features new to MAUI include a unified project interface, hot reloading, support for Blazor Desktop and hybrid apps, and improved performance and startup times. See https://github.com/dotnet/maui for more information.