# Conversions
We covered numeric conversions in previous chapters and sections; Table 6-7 summarizes all of the options.

Table 6-7. Summary of numeric conversions
Task	Functions	Examples
e	`Parse`
TryParse	double d = double.Parse ("3.5");
int i;
bool ok = int.TryParse ("3", out i);

`Parsing from base 2, 8, or 16`	Convert.ToIntegral	int i = Convert.ToInt32 ("1E", 16);

`Formatting to hexadecimal`	ToString ("X")	string hex = 45.ToString ("X");

`Lossless numeric conversion`	Implicit cast	int i = 23;
double d = i;

`Truncating numeric conversion`	Explicit cast	double d = 23.5;
int i = (int) d;

`Rounding numeric conversion (real to integral)	`Convert.ToIntegral	double d = 23.5;
int i = Convert.ToInt32 (d);

# Math
Table 6-8 lists the key members of the static Math class. The trigonometric functions accept arguments of type double; other methods such as Max are overloaded to operate on all numeric types. The Math class also defines the mathematical constants E (e) and PI.

Table 6-8. Methods in the static Math class
Category	Methods
Rounding	Round, Truncate, Floor, Ceiling
Maximum/minimum	Max, Min
Absolute value and sign	Abs, Sign
Square root	Sqrt
Raising to a power	Pow, Exp
Logarithm	Log, Log10
Trigonometric	Sin, Cos, Tan,
Sinh, Cosh, Tanh,
Asin, Acos, Atan
The Round method lets you specify the number of decimal places with which to round as well as how to handle midpoints (away from zero, or with banker’s rounding). Floor and Ceiling round to the nearest integer: Floor always rounds down, and Ceiling always rounds up—even with negative numbers.

Max and Min accept only two arguments. If you have an array or sequence of numbers, use the Max and Min extension methods in System.Linq.Enumerable.
# BigInteger
BigInteger is a .NET data type that represents an arbitrarily large integer, which can be very useful when dealing with large numbers that cannot be handled by standard integral data types like `int, long, or decimal`. Here are some examples of situations where BigInteger might be useful:

`Cryptography`: BigInteger can be used in cryptography algorithms, where large integers are frequently used.

`Financial calculations`: BigInteger can be used for precise calculations in financial applications that involve large numbers.

`Scientific computations`: BigInteger can be used in scientific calculations, such as factorials or large exponents.

`Game development`: BigInteger can be used in game development for handling large numbers of points or scores.

`Network protocols`: BigInteger can be used in network protocols that use large numbers for encryption, authentication, or error detection.

In general, whenever you need to work with very large numbers, BigInteger can be a useful tool.

`The BigInteger struct `is a specialized numeric type. It resides in the System.Numerics namespace and allows you to represent an arbitrarily large integer without any loss of precision.

C# doesn’t provide native support for BigInteger, so there’s no way to represent BigInteger literals. You can, however, implicitly convert from any other integral type to a BigInteger:

BigInteger twentyFive = 25;      // implicit conversion from integer
To represent a bigger number, such as one googol (10100), you can use one of BigInteger’s static methods, such as Pow (raise to the power):

BigInteger googol = BigInteger.Pow (10, 100);
Alternatively, you can Parse a string:

BigInteger googol = BigInteger.Parse ("1".PadRight (101, '0'));
Calling ToString() on this prints every digit:

Console.WriteLine (googol.ToString()); // 10000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
You can perform potentially lossy conversions between BigInteger and the standard numeric types by using the explicit cast operator:

double g2 = (double) googol;        // Explicit cast
BigInteger g3 = (BigInteger) g2;    // Explicit cast
Console.WriteLine (g3);
The output from this demonstrates the loss of precision:

9999999999999999673361688041166912...
BigInteger overloads all the arithmetic operators including remainder (%) as well as the comparison and equality operators.

You can also construct a BigInteger from a byte array. The following code generates a 32-byte random number suitable for cryptography and then assigns it to a BigInteger:

// This uses the System.Security.Cryptography namespace:
RandomNumberGenerator rand = RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
byte[] bytes = new byte [32];
rand.GetBytes (bytes);
var bigRandomNumber = new BigInteger (bytes);   // Convert to BigInteger
The advantage of storing such a number in a BigInteger over a byte array is that you get value-type semantics. Calling ToByteArray converts a BigInteger back to a byte array.

# Half
The `Half struct` is a 16-bit floating point type and was introduced with .NET 5. Half is intended mainly for interoperating with graphics card processors and does not have native support in most CPUs.
- It is useful in scenarios where storage and memory are limited, such as graphics processing and mobile devices.

Some common use cases of Half in .NET include:
  - `Storing and processing 3D graphics data`, such as vertex positions, normals, and texture coordinates, which require high precision but also need to be stored and transmitted efficiently.
  - `Implementing machine learning models`, which can use Half instead of float to reduce memory usage and increase performance.
  - `Storing and processing large amounts of data` on mobile devices or other memory-constrained environments.
  - I`nteroperating with other systems or libraries` that use half-precision floating-point numbers.
You can convert between Half and float or double via an explicit cast:

Half h = (Half) 123.456;
Console.WriteLine (h);     // 123.44  (note loss of precision)
There are no arithmetic operations defined for this type, so you must convert to another type such as float or double in order to perform calculations.

Half has a range of –65500 to 65500:

Console.WriteLine (Half.MinValue);   // -65500
Console.WriteLine (Half.MaxValue);   // 65500
Note the loss of precision at the maximum range:

Console.WriteLine ((Half)65500);     // 65500
Console.WriteLine ((Half)65490);     // 65500
Console.WriteLine ((Half)65480);     // 65470

# Complex
The Complex struct is another specialized numeric type that represents complex numbers with real and imaginary components of type double. Complex resides in the namespace (along with BigInteger).

To use Complex, instantiate the struct, specifying the real and imaginary values:

var c1 = new Complex (2, 3.5);
var c2 = new Complex (3, 0);
There are also implicit conversions from the standard numeric types.

The Complex struct exposes properties for the real and imaginary values as well as the phase and magnitude:

Console.WriteLine (c1.Real);       // 2
Console.WriteLine (c1.Imaginary);  // 3.5
Console.WriteLine (c1.Phase);      // 1.05165021254837
Console.WriteLine (c1.Magnitude);  // 4.03112887414927
You can also construct a Complex number by specifying magnitude and phase:

Complex c3 = Complex.FromPolarCoordinates (1.3, 5);
The standard arithmetic operators are overloaded to work on Complex numbers:

Console.WriteLine (c1 + c2);    // (5, 3.5)
Console.WriteLine (c1 * c2);    // (6, 10.5)
The Complex struct exposes static methods for more advanced functions, including the following:

Trigonometric (Sin, Asin, Sinh, Tan, etc.)

Logarithms and exponentiations

Conjugate

# Random
The Random class generates a pseudorandom sequence of random bytes, integers, or doubles.

To use Random, you first instantiate it, optionally providing a seed to initiate the random number series. Using the same seed guarantees the same series of numbers (if run under the same CLR version), which is sometimes useful when you want reproducibility:

Random r1 = new Random (1);
Random r2 = new Random (1);
Console.WriteLine (r1.Next (100) + ", " + r1.Next (100));      // 24, 11
Console.WriteLine (r2.Next (100) + ", " + r2.Next (100));      // 24, 11
If you don’t want reproducibility, you can construct Random with no seed; in that case, it uses the current system time to make one up.

NOTE
Because the system clock has limited granularity, two Random instances created close together (typically within 10 ms) will yield the same sequence of values. A common trap is to instantiate a new Random object every time you need a random number rather than reusing the same object.

A good pattern is to declare a single static Random instance. In multithreaded scenarios, however, this can cause trouble because Random objects are not thread-safe. We describe a workaround in “Thread-Local Storage”.

## should we  instantiate a new Random object every time you need a random number or use the same object?
It is generally `recommended to reuse the same Random object rather than creating a new one every time you need a random number.` The reason for this is that Random objects are initialized with a seed value, and if you create a new object every time you need a random number, the seed value may be the same for multiple objects, resulting in a non-random sequence of numbers.

To avoid this issue, you can create a single Random object and use it throughout your application. Alternatively, you can use the ThreadStatic attribute to create a separate Random object for each thread in a multi-threaded application.

It is also worth noting that the Random class is not considered cryptographically secure, so it should not be used for generating random numbers for security purposes. For security-critical applications, `you should use a cryptographic random number generator, such as the one provided by the System.Security.Cryptography namespace.`


Calling Next(n) generates a random integer between 0 and n−1. NextDouble generates a random double between 0 and 1. NextBytes fills a byte array with random values.

Random is not considered random enough for high-security applications such as cryptography. For this, .NET provides a cryptographically strong random number generator, in the System.Security.Cryptography namespace. Here’s how to use it:
```c#
var rand = System.Security.Cryptography.RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
byte[] bytes = new byte [32];
rand.GetBytes (bytes);       // Fill the byte array with random numbers.
```
The downside is that it’s less flexible: filling a byte array is the only means of obtaining random numbers. To obtain an integer, you must use BitConverter:
```c#
byte[] bytes = new byte [4];
rand.GetBytes (bytes);
int i = BitConverter.ToInt32 (bytes, 0);
```