# what different lamda expression and linq?
`Lambda expressions and LINQ (Language Integrated Query)` are both features of the C# programming language that are used to write concise and expressive code for querying data. However, they are distinct features with different purposes.

`Lambda expressions` are a shorthand syntax for defining an anonymous function, which can be passed as an argument to another function or used as a delegate. They allow you to define a function on-the-fly without having to declare a separate method.

`LINQ`, on the other hand, is a set of extensions to the C# language that provides a unified syntax for querying data from different sources, such as collections, arrays, and databases. LINQ queries are typically written using lambda expressions and a set of standard query operators that allow you to filter, sort, group, and project data.

In other words, lambda expressions are a general feature of the C# language that allow you to write anonymous functions, whereas LINQ is a specific feature of C# that uses lambda expressions to provide a unified syntax for querying data.

To `summarize`:

`Lambda expressions` are a shorthand syntax for defining anonymous functions.
`LINQ` is a set of extensions to C# that provides a unified syntax for querying data from different sources.
`LINQ queries` are typically written using lambda expressions and a set of standard query operators.
# LINQ Queries
LINQ, or Language Integrated Query, is a set of language and runtime features for writing structured type-safe queries over local object collections and remote data sources.

LINQ enables you to query any collection implementing IEnumerable<T>, whether an array, list, or XML Document Object Model (DOM), as well as remote data sources, such as tables in an SQL Server database. LINQ offers the benefits of both compile-time type checking and dynamic query composition.

This chapter describes the LINQ architecture and the fundamentals of writing queries. All core types are defined in the System.Linq and System.Linq.Expressions namespaces.

# Getting Started
The basic units of data in LINQ are sequences and elements. A sequence is any object that implements IEnumerable<T>, and an element is each item in the sequence. In the following example, names is a sequence, and "Tom", "Dick", and "Harry" are elements:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry" };
We call this a local sequence because it represents a local collection of objects in memory.

A query operator is a method that transforms a sequence. A typical query operator accepts an input sequence and emits a transformed output sequence. In the Enumerable class in System.Linq, there are around 40 query operators—all implemented as static extension methods. These are called standard query operators.

`NOTE`
Queries that operate over local sequences are called local queries or LINQ-to-objects queries.

LINQ also supports sequences that can be dynamically fed from a `remote data source such as an SQL Server database`. These sequences additionally implement the `IQueryable<T>` interface and are supported through a matching set of standard query operators in the Queryable class

A query is an expression that, when enumerated, transforms sequences with query operators. The simplest query comprises one input sequence and one operator. For instance, we can apply the Where operator on a simple array to extract those strings whose length is at least four characters, as follows:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry" };
IEnumerable<string> filteredNames = System.Linq.Enumerable.Where
                                    (names, n => n.Length >= 4);
foreach (string n in filteredNames)
  Console.WriteLine (n);

Dick
Harry
Because the standard query operators are implemented as extension methods, we can call Where directly on names, as though it were an instance method:

IEnumerable<string> filteredNames = names.Where (n => n.Length >= 4);
For this to compile, you must import the System.Linq namespace. Here’s a complete example:
```c#
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Linq;

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry" };

IEnumerable<string> filteredNames = names.Where (n => n.Length >= 4);
foreach (string name in filteredNames) Console.WriteLine (name);

Dick
Harry
```

`Most query operators accept a lambda expression as an argument`. The lambda expression helps guide and shape the query. In our example, the lambda expression is as follows:
```c#
n => n.Length >= 4
```

The input argument corresponds to an input element. In this case, the input argument n represents each name in the array and is of type string. The Where operator requires that the lambda expression return a bool value, which if true, indicates that the element should be included in the output sequence. Here’s its signature:

public static IEnumerable<TSource> Where<TSource>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,bool> predicate)
The following query extracts all names that contain the letter “a”:

IEnumerable<string> filteredNames = names.Where (n => n.Contains ("a"));

foreach (string name in filteredNames)
  Console.WriteLine (name);             // Harry

So far, we’ve built queries using extension methods and lambda expressions. As you’ll see shortly, this strategy is highly composable in that it allows the chaining of query operators. In this book, we refer to this as fluent syntax.1 C# also provides another syntax for writing queries, called query expression syntax. Here’s our preceding query written as a query expression:

IEnumerable<string> filteredNames = from n in names
                                    where n.Contains ("a")
                                    select n;
Fluent syntax and query syntax are complementary. In the following two sections, we explore each in

# Fluent Syntax
Fluent syntax is the most flexible and fundamental. In this section, we describe how to chain query operators to form more complex queries—and show why extension methods are important to this process. We also describe how to formulate lambda expressions for a query operator and introduce several new query operators.

Chaining Query Operators
In the preceding section, we showed two simple queries, each comprising a single query operator. To build more complex queries, you append additional query operators to the expression, creating a chain. To illustrate, the following query extracts all strings containing the letter “a,” sorts them by length, and then converts the results to uppercase:
```c#
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Linq;

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };

IEnumerable<string> query = names
  .Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"))
  .OrderBy (n => n.Length)
  .Select  (n => n.ToUpper());

foreach (string name in query) Console.WriteLine (name);

JAY
MARY
HARRY
NOTE
```
The variable, n, in our example, is` privately scoped` to each of the lambda expressions. We can reuse the identifier n for the same reason that we can reuse the identifier c in the following method:
```c#
void Test()
{
  foreach (char c in "string1") Console.Write (c);
  foreach (char c in "string2") Console.Write (c);
  foreach (char c in "string3") Console.Write (c);
}
```
# NOTE
A query operator never alters the input sequence; instead, it returns a new sequence. This is consistent with the functional programming paradigm from which LINQ was inspired.

Here are the signatures of each of these extension methods (with the OrderBy signature slightly simplified):

public static IEnumerable<TSource> Where<TSource>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,bool> predicate)

public static IEnumerable<TSource> OrderBy<TSource,TKey>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,TKey> keySelector)

public static IEnumerable<TResult> Select<TSource,TResult>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,TResult> selector)

When query operators are chained as in this example, the output sequence of one operator is the input sequence of the next. 


We can construct the identical query progressively, as follows:
```c#
// You must import the System.Linq namespace for this to compile:

IEnumerable<string> filtered   = names   .Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"));
IEnumerable<string> sorted     = filtered.OrderBy (n => n.Length);
IEnumerable<string> finalQuery = sorted  .Select  (n => n.ToUpper());
```

finalQuery is compositionally identical to the query we constructed previously. Further, each intermediate step also comprises a valid query that we can execute:

foreach (string name in filtered)
  Console.Write (name + "|");        // Harry|Mary|Jay|

Console.WriteLine();
foreach (string name in sorted)
  Console.Write (name + "|");        // Jay|Mary|Harry|

Console.WriteLine();
foreach (string name in finalQuery)
  Console.Write (name + "|");        // JAY|MARY|HARRY|

# Why extension methods are important
Instead of using extension method syntax, you can use conventional static method syntax to call the query operators:

IEnumerable<string> filtered = Enumerable.Where (names,
                                                 n => n.Contains ("a"));
IEnumerable<string> sorted = Enumerable.OrderBy (filtered, n => n.Length);
IEnumerable<string> finalQuery = Enumerable.Select (sorted,
                                                    n => n.ToUpper());

                                                    This is, in fact, how the compiler translates extension method calls. Shunning extension methods comes at a cost, however, if you want to write a query in a single statement as we did earlier. Let’s revisit the single-statement query—first in extension method syntax:

IEnumerable<string> query = names.Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"))
                                 .OrderBy (n => n.Length)
                                 .Select  (n => n.ToUpper());
Its natural linear shape reflects the left-to-right flow of data and also keeps lambda expressions alongside their query operators (infix notation). Without extension methods, the query loses its fluency:

IEnumerable<string> query =
  Enumerable.Select (
    Enumerable.OrderBy (
      Enumerable.Where (
        names, n => n.Contains ("a")
      ), n => n.Length
    ), n => n.ToUpper()
  );

# Composing Lambda Expressions
In previous examples, we fed the following lambda expression to the Where operator:

n => n.Contains ("a")      // Input type = string, return type = bool.
NOTE
A lambda expression that takes a value and returns a bool is called a predicate.

The purpose of the lambda expression depends on the particular query operator. With the Where operator, it indicates whether an element should be included in the output sequence. In the case of the OrderBy operator, the lambda expression maps each element in the input sequence to its sorting key. With the Select operator, the lambda expression determines how each element in the input sequence is transformed before being fed to the output sequence.

NOTE
A lambda expression in a query operator always works on individual elements in the input sequence—not the sequence as a whole.

The query operator evaluates your lambda expression upon demand, typically once per element in the input sequence. Lambda expressions allow you to feed your own logic into the query operators. This makes the query operators versatile as well as being simple under the hood. Here’s a complete implementation of Enumerable.Where, exception handling aside:
```c#
public static IEnumerable<TSource> Where<TSource>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,bool> predicate)
{
  foreach (TSource element in source)
    if (predicate (element))
      yield return element;
}
```

# Lambda expressions and Func signatures
The standard query operators utilize generic Func delegates. Func is a family of general-purpose generic delegates in the System namespace, defined with the following intent:

The type arguments in Func appear in the same order they do in lambda expressions.

Hence, Func<TSource,bool> matches a TSource=>bool lambda expression: one that accepts a TSource argument and returns a bool value.

Similarly, Func<TSource,TResult> matches a TSource=>TResult lambda expression.

Lambda expressions and element typing
The standard query operators use the following type parameter names:

Generic type letter	Meaning
TSource	Element type for the input sequence
TResult	Element type for the output sequence (if different from TSource)
TKey	Element type for the key used in sorting, grouping, or joining
TSource is determined by the input sequence. TResult and TKey are typically inferred from your lambda expression.

For example, consider the signature of the Select query operator:

public static IEnumerable<TResult> Select<TSource,TResult>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,TResult> selector)
Func<TSource,TResult> matches a TSource=>TResult lambda expression: one that maps an input element to an output element. TSource and TResult can be different types, so the lambda expression can change the type of each element. Further, the lambda expression determines the output sequence type. The following query uses Select to transform string type elements to integer type elements:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };
IEnumerable<int> query = names.Select (n => n.Length);

foreach (int length in query)
  Console.Write (length + "|");    // 3|4|5|4|3|
The compiler can infer the type of TResult from the return value of the lambda expression. In this case, n.Length returns an int value, so TResult is inferred to be int.

The Where query operator is simpler and requires no type inference for the output because input and output elements are of the same type. This makes sense because the operator merely filters elements; it does not transform them:

public static IEnumerable<TSource> Where<TSource>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,bool> predicate)
Finally, consider the signature of the OrderBy operator:

// Slightly simplified:
public static IEnumerable<TSource> OrderBy<TSource,TKey>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,TKey> keySelector)

Func<TSource,TKey> maps an input element to a sorting key. TKey is inferred from your lambda expression and is separate from the input and output element types. For instance, we could choose to sort a list of names by length (int key) or alphabetically (string key):

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };
IEnumerable<string> sortedByLength, sortedAlphabetically;
sortedByLength       = names.OrderBy (n => n.Length);   // int key
sortedAlphabetically = names.OrderBy (n => n);          // string key

# Natural Ordering
The original ordering of elements within an input sequence is significant in LINQ. Some query operators rely on this ordering, such as Take, Skip, and Reverse.

The Take operator outputs the first x elements, discarding the rest:

int[] numbers  = { 10, 9, 8, 7, 6 };
IEnumerable<int> firstThree = numbers.Take (3);     // { 10, 9, 8 }
The Skip operator ignores the first x elements and outputs the rest:

IEnumerable<int> lastTwo    = numbers.Skip (3);     // { 7, 6 }
Reverse does exactly as it says:

IEnumerable<int> reversed   = numbers.Reverse();    // { 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 }
With local queries (LINQ-to-objects), operators such as Where and Select preserve the original ordering of the input sequence (as do all other query operators, except for those that specifically change the ordering).

# Other Operators
Not all query operators return a sequence. The element operators extract one element from the input sequence; examples are First, Last, and ElementAt:

int[] numbers    = { 10, 9, 8, 7, 6 };
int firstNumber  = numbers.First();                        // 10
int lastNumber   = numbers.Last();                         // 6
int secondNumber = numbers.ElementAt(1);                   // 9
int secondLowest = numbers.OrderBy(n=>n).Skip(1).First();  // 7

# Because these operators return a single element, you don’t usually call further query operators on their result unless that element itself is a collection.

The aggregation operators return a scalar value, usually of numeric type:

int count = numbers.Count();          // 5;
int min = numbers.Min();              // 6;
The quantifiers return a bool value:

bool hasTheNumberNine = numbers.Contains (9);          // true
bool hasMoreThanZeroElements = numbers.Any();          // true
bool hasAnOddElement = numbers.Any (n => n % 2 != 0);  // true
Some query operators accept two input sequences. Examples are Concat, which appends one sequence to another, and Union, which does the same but with duplicates removed:

int[] seq1 = { 1, 2, 3 };
int[] seq2 = { 3, 4, 5 };
IEnumerable<int> concat = seq1.Concat (seq2);    //  { 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5 }
IEnumerable<int> union  = seq1.Union (seq2);     //  { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }

