# Conversion Methods
LINQ deals primarily in sequences; in other words, collections of type IEnumerable<T>. The conversion methods convert to and from other types of collections:

Method	Description
`OfType`	Converts IEnumerable to IEnumerable<T>, discarding wrongly typed elements
`Cast`	Converts IEnumerable to IEnumerable<T>, throwing an exception if there are any wrongly typed elements
`ToArray`	Converts IEnumerable<T> to T[]
`ToList`	Converts IEnumerable<T> to List<T>
`ToDictionary`	Converts IEnumerable<T> to Dictionary<TKey,TValue>
`ToLookup`	Converts IEnumerable<T> to ILookup<TKey,TElement>
`AsEnumerable`	Upcasts to IEnumerable<T>
`AsQueryable`	Casts or converts to IQueryable<T>

# OfType and Cast
OfType and Cast accept a nongeneric IEnumerable collection and emit a generic IEnumerable<T> sequence that you can subsequently query:
```c#
ArrayList classicList = new ArrayList();          // in System.Collections
classicList.AddRange ( new int[] { 3, 4, 5 } );
IEnumerable<int> sequence1 = classicList.Cast<int>();
```
`Cast` and `OfType` differ in their behavior when encountering an input element that’s of an incompatible type. `Cast` throws an exception; `OfType` ignores the incompatible element. Continuing the preceding example:
```c#
DateTime offender = DateTime.Now;
classicList.Add (offender);
IEnumerable<int>
  sequence2 = classicList.OfType<int>(), // OK - ignores offending DateTime
  sequence3 = classicList.Cast<int>();   // Throws exception
```
The rules for element compatibility exactly follow those of C#’s `is` operator, and therefore consider only reference conversions and unboxing conversions. We can see this by examining the internal implementation of `OfType`:
```c#
public static IEnumerable<TSource> OfType <TSource> (IEnumerable source)
{
  foreach (object element in source)
    if (element is TSource)
      yield return (TSource)element;
}
```

`Cast` has an identical implementation, except that it omits the type compatibility test:
```c#
public static IEnumerable<TSource> Cast <TSource> (IEnumerable source)
{
  foreach (object element in source)
    yield return (TSource)element;
}
```
A consequence of these implementations is that you cannot use Cast to perform numeric or custom conversions (for these, you must perform a Select operation instead). In other words, Cast is not as flexible as C#’s cast operator:
```c#
int i = 3;
long l = i;         // Implicit numeric conversion int->long
int i2 = (int) l;   // Explicit numeric conversion long->int
```
We can demonstrate this by attempting to use OfType or Cast to convert a sequence of ints to a sequence of longs:
```c#
int[] integers = { 1, 2, 3 };

IEnumerable<long> test1 = integers.OfType<long>();
IEnumerable<long> test2 = integers.Cast<long>();
```
When enumerated, test1 emits zero elements and test2 throws an exception. Examining OfType’s implementation, it’s fairly clear why. After substituting TSource, we get the following expression:

(element is long)
This returns false for an int element, due to the lack of an inheritance relationship.

NOTE
The reason that test2 throws an exception when enumerated is more subtle. Notice in Cast’s implementation that element is of type object. When TSource is a value type, the CLR assumes this is an unboxing conversion and synthesizes a method that reproduces the scenario described in the section “Boxing and Unboxing”:

int value = 123;
object element = value;
long result = (long) element;  // exception

Because the element variable is declared of type object, an object-to-long cast is performed (an unboxing) rather than an int-to-long numeric conversion. Unboxing operations require an exact type match, so the object-to-long unbox fails when given an int.

As we suggested previously, the solution is to use an ordinary Select:

IEnumerable<long> castLong = integers.Select (s => (long) s);
OfType and Cast are also useful in downcasting elements in a generic input sequence. For instance, if you have an input sequence of type IEnumerable<Fruit>, OfType<Apple> would return just the apples. This is particularly useful in LINQ to XML

Cast has query syntax support: simply precede the range variable with a type:

from TreeNode node in myTreeView.Nodes
...

# ToArray, ToList, ToDictionary, ToHashSet, and ToLookup