# Query Expressions
C# provides a syntactic shortcut for writing LINQ queries, called query expressions. Contrary to popular belief, a query expression is not a means of embedding SQL into C#. In fact, the design of query expressions was inspired primarily by list comprehensions from functional programming languages such as LISP and Haskell, although SQL had a cosmetic influence.

In the preceding section, we wrote a fluent-syntax query to extract strings containing the letter “a,” sorted by length and converted to uppercase. Here’s the same thing in query syntax:

using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Linq;

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };

IEnumerable<string> query =
  from    n in names
  where   n.Contains ("a")     // Filter elements
  orderby n.Length             // Sort elements
  select  n.ToUpper();         // Translate each element (project)

foreach (string name in query) Console.WriteLine (name);

JAY
MARY
HARRY


Query expressions always start with a from clause and end with either a select or group clause. The from clause declares a range variable (in this case, n), which you can think of as traversing the input sequence—rather like foreach.
https://learning.oreilly.com/api/v2/epubs/urn:orm:book:9781098121945/files/assets/cn10_0802.png

The compiler processes a query expression by translating it into fluent syntax. It does this in a fairly mechanical fashion—much like it translates foreach statements into calls to GetEnumerator and MoveNext. This means that anything you can write in query syntax you can also write in fluent syntax. The compiler (initially) translates our example query into the following:

```c#
IEnumerable<string> query = names.Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"))
                                 .OrderBy (n => n.Length)
                                 .Select  (n => n.ToUpper());
```
The Where, OrderBy, and Select operators then resolve using the same rules that would apply if the query were written in fluent syntax. In this case, they bind to extension methods in the Enumerable class because the System.Linq namespace is imported and names implements IEnumerable<string>. The compiler doesn’t specifically favor the Enumerable class, however, when translating query expressions. You can think of the compiler as mechanically injecting the words “Where,” “OrderBy,” and “Select” into the statement and then compiling it as though you had typed the method names yourself. This offers flexibility in how they resolve. The operators in the database queries that we write in later sections, for instance, will bind instead to extension methods in Queryable.

Range Variables
The identifier immediately following the from keyword syntax is called the range variable. A range variable refers to the current element in the sequence on which the operation is to be performed.

In our examples, the range variable n appears in every clause in the query. And yet, the variable actually enumerates over a different sequence with each clause:

from    n in names           // n is our range variable
where   n.Contains ("a")     // n = directly from the array
orderby n.Length             // n = subsequent to being filtered
select  n.ToUpper()          // n = subsequent to being sorted
This becomes clear when we examine the compiler’s mechanical translation to fluent syntax:

names.Where   (n => n.Contains ("a"))      // Locally scoped n
     .OrderBy (n => n.Length)              // Locally scoped n
     .Select  (n => n.ToUpper())           // Locally scoped n
As you can see, each instance of n is scoped privately to its own lambda expression.

Query expressions also let you introduce new range variables via the following clauses:

let

into

An additional from clause

join

# Query Syntax Versus SQL Syntax
Query expressions look superficially like SQL, yet the two are very different. A LINQ query boils down to a C# expression, and so follows standard C# rules. For example, with LINQ, you cannot use a variable before you declare it. In SQL, you can reference a table alias in the SELECT clause before defining it in a FROM clause.

A subquery in LINQ is just another C# expression and so requires no special syntax. Subqueries in SQL are subject to special rules.

With LINQ, data logically flows from left to right through the query. With SQL, the order is less well structured with regard to data flow.

A LINQ query comprises a conveyor belt or pipeline of operators that accept and emit sequences whose element order can matter. An SQL query comprises a network of clauses that work mostly with unordered sets.

# Query Syntax Versus Fluent Syntax
Query and fluent syntax each have advantages.

Query syntax is simpler for queries that involve any of the following:

A let clause for introducing a new variable alongside the range variable

SelectMany, Join, or GroupJoin, followed by an outer range variable reference

(We describe the let clause in “Composition Strategies”; we describe SelectMany, Join, and GroupJoin in Chapter 9.)

The middle ground is queries that involve the simple use of Where, OrderBy, and Select. Either syntax works well; the choice here is largely personal.

For queries that comprise a single operator, fluent syntax is shorter and less cluttered.

Finally, there are many operators that have no keyword in query syntax. These require that you use fluent syntax—at least in part. This means any operator outside of the following:

Where, Select, SelectMany
OrderBy, ThenBy, OrderByDescending, ThenByDescending
GroupBy, Join, GroupJoin

# Mixed-Syntax Queries
If a query operator has no query-syntax support, you can mix query syntax and fluent syntax. The only restriction is that each query-syntax component must be complete (i.e., start with a from clause and end with a select or group clause).

Assuming this array declaration

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };
the following example counts the number of names containing the letter “a”:

int matches = (from n in names where n.Contains ("a") select n).Count();
// 3
The next query obtains the first name in alphabetical order:

string first = (from n in names orderby n select n).First();   // Dick
The mixed-syntax approach is sometimes beneficial in more complex queries. With these simple examples, however, we could stick to fluent syntax throughout without penalty:

int matches = names.Where (n => n.Contains ("a")).Count();   // 3
string first = names.OrderBy (n => n).First();               // Dick
NOTE
There are times when mixed-syntax queries offer by far the highest “bang for the buck” in terms of function and simplicity. It’s important not to unilaterally favor either query or fluent syntax; otherwise, you’ll be unable to write mixed-syntax queries when they are the best option.

