
# Select
Argument	Type
Source sequence	IEnumerable<TSource>
Result selector	TSource => TResult or (TSource,int) => TResulta
a Prohibited with EF Core

Query syntax
select projection-expression
Enumerable implementation
public static IEnumerable<TResult> Select<TSource,TResult>
  (this IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,TResult> selector)
{
  foreach (TSource element in source)
    yield return selector (element);
}

Overview
With Select, you always get the same number of elements that you started with. Each element, however, can be transformed in any manner by the lambda function.

The following selects the names of all fonts installed on the computer (from System.Drawing):

IEnumerable<string> query = from f in FontFamily.Families
                            select f.Name;

foreach (string name in query) Console.WriteLine (name);
In this example, the select clause converts a FontFamily object to its name. Here’s the lambda equivalent:

IEnumerable<string> query = FontFamily.Families.Select (f => f.Name);
Select statements are often used to project into anonymous types:

var query =
  from f in FontFamily.Families
  select new { f.Name, LineSpacing = f.GetLineSpacing (FontStyle.Bold) };
A projection with no transformation is sometimes used with query syntax to satisfy the requirement that the query end in a select or group clause. The following selects fonts supporting strikeout:

IEnumerable<FontFamily> query =
  from f in FontFamily.Families
  where f.IsStyleAvailable (FontStyle.Strikeout)
  select f;

foreach (FontFamily ff in query) Console.WriteLine (ff.Name);
In such cases, the compiler omits the projection when translating to fluent syntax.

#  Indexed projection
The selector expression can optionally accept an integer argument, which acts as an indexer, providing the expression with the position of each input in the input sequence. This works only with local queries:

string[] names = { "Tom", "Dick", "Harry", "Mary", "Jay" };

IEnumerable<string> query = names
  .Select ((s,i) => i + "=" + s);     //  { "0=Tom", "1=Dick", ... }
Select subqueries and object hierarchies
You can nest a subquery in a select clause to build an object hierarchy. The following example returns a collection describing each directory under Path.GetTempPath(), with a subcollection of files under each directory:

string tempPath = Path.GetTempPath();
DirectoryInfo[] dirs = new DirectoryInfo (tempPath).GetDirectories();

var query =
  from d in dirs
  where (d.Attributes & FileAttributes.System) == 0
  select new
  {
    DirectoryName = d.FullName,
    Created = d.CreationTime,

    Files = from f in d.GetFiles()
            where (f.Attributes & FileAttributes.Hidden) == 0
            select new { FileName = f.Name, f.Length, }
  };

foreach (var dirFiles in query)
{
  Console.WriteLine ("Directory: " + dirFiles.DirectoryName);
  foreach (var file in dirFiles.Files)
    Console.WriteLine ("  " + file.FileName + " Len: " + file.Length);
}
The inner portion of this query can be called a correlated subquery. A subquery is correlated if it references an object in the outer query—in this case, it references d, the directory being enumerated.

A subquery inside a Select allows you to map one object hierarchy to another, or map a relational object model to a hierarchical object model.

`With local queries, a subquery within a Select causes double-deferred execution`. In our example, the files aren’t filtered or projected until the inner foreach statement enumerates.

# Subqueries and joins in EF Core
`Subquery projections work well in EF Core, and you can use them to do the work of SQL-style joins`. Here’s how we retrieve each customer’s name along with their high-value purchases:

var query =
  from c in dbContext.Customers
  select new {
               c.Name,
               Purchases = (from p in dbContext.Purchases
                           where p.CustomerID == c.ID && p.Price > 1000
                           select new { p.Description, p.Price })
                           .ToList()
             };

foreach (var namePurchases in query)
{
  Console.WriteLine ("Customer: " + namePurchases.Name);
  foreach (var purchaseDetail in namePurchases.Purchases)
    Console.WriteLine ("  - $$$: " + purchaseDetail.Price);
}
NOTE
Note the use of ToList in the subquery. EF Core 3 cannot create queryables from the subquery result when that subquery references the DbContext. This issue is being tracked by the EF Core team and might be resolved in a future release.

This style of query is ideally suited to interpreted queries. The outer query and subquery are processed as a unit, preventing unnecessary round-tripping. With local queries, however, it’s inefficient because every combination of outer and inner elements must be enumerated to get the few matching combinations. A better choice for local queries is Join or GroupJoin, described in the following sections.

This query matches up objects from two disparate collections, and it can be thought of as a “join.” The difference between this and a conventional database join (or subquery) is that we’re not flattening the output into a single two-dimensional result set. We’re mapping the relational data to hierarchical data, rather than to flat data.

Here’s the same query simplified by using the Purchases collection navigation property on the Customer entity:

from c in dbContext.Customers
select new
{
  c.Name,
  Purchases = from p in c.Purchases    // Purchases is List<Purchase>
              where p.Price > 1000
              select new { p.Description, p.Price }
};

`Both queries are analogous to a left outer join in SQL in the sense that we get all customers in the outer enumeratio`n, regardless of whether they have any purchases. To emulate an inner join—whereby customers without high-value purchases are excluded—we would need to add a filter condition on the purchases collection:
```c#
from c in dbContext.Customers
where c.Purchases.Any (p => p.Price > 1000)
select new {
             c.Name,
             Purchases = from p in c.Purchases
                         where p.Price > 1000
                         select new { p.Description, p.Price }
           };
```
This style of query is flexible. By changing Any to Count, for instance, we can modify the query to retrieve only customers with at least two high-value purchases:
```c#
...
where highValueP.Count() >= 2
select new { c.Name, Purchases = highValueP };
```

# Projecting into concrete types
In the examples so far, we’ve instantiated anonymous types in the output. It can also be useful to instantiate (ordinary) named classes, which you populate with object initializers. Such classes can include custom logic and can be passed between methods and assemblies without using type information.

A typical example is a custom business entity. A custom business entity is simply a class that you write with some properties but is designed to hide lower-level (database-related) details. You might exclude foreign key fields from business-entity classes, for instance. Assuming that we wrote custom entity classes called CustomerEntity and PurchaseEntity, here’s how we could project into them:

```c#
IQueryable<CustomerEntity> query =
  from c in dbContext.Customers
  select new CustomerEntity
  {
    Name = c.Name,
    Purchases =
      (from p in c.Purchases
       where p.Price > 1000
       select new PurchaseEntity {
                                   Description = p.Description,
                                   Value = p.Price
                                 }
      ).ToList()
  };

// Force query execution, converting output to a more convenient List:
List<CustomerEntity> result = query.ToList();
```

`NOTE`
When created to transfer data between tiers in a program or between separate systems, custom business entity classes are often called data transfer objects (DTO). DTOs contain no business logic.

Notice that so far, we’ve not had to use a Join or SelectMany statement. This is because we’re maintaining the hierarchical shape of the data, as illustrated in Figure 9-2. With LINQ, you can often avoid the traditional SQL approach of flattening tables into a two-dimensional result set.

# SelectMany
Argument	Type
Source sequence	IEnumerable<TSource>
Result selector	TSource => IEnumerable<TResult>
or (TSource,int) => IEnumerable<TResult>a

`Prohibited with EF Core`

## Query syntax
from identifier1 in enumerable-expression1
from identifier2 in enumerable-expression2
...
Enumerable implementation
```c#
public static IEnumerable<TResult> SelectMany<TSource,TResult>
  (IEnumerable<TSource> source,
   Func <TSource,IEnumerable<TResult>> selector)
{
  foreach (TSource element in source)
    foreach (TResult subElement in selector (element))
      yield return subElement;
}
```
Overview
`SelectMany concatenates subsequences into a single flat output sequence`.

Recall that for each input element, Select yields exactly one output element. In contrast, SelectMany yields 0..n output elements. The 0..n elements come from a subsequence or child sequence that the lambda expression must emit.

You can use SelectMany to expand child sequences, flatten nested collections, and join two collections into a flat output sequence. Using the conveyor belt analogy, SelectMany funnels fresh material onto a conveyor belt. With SelectMany, each input element is the trigger for the introduction of fresh material. The fresh material is emitted by the selector lambda expression and must be a sequence. In other words, the lambda expression must emit a child sequence per input element. The final result is a concatenation of the child sequences emitted for each input element.

Starting with a simple example, suppose that we have the following array of names,
```c#
string[] fullNames = { "Anne Williams", "John Fred Smith", "Sue Green" };
```
that we want to convert to a single flat collection of words—in other words:
```c#
"Anne", "Williams", "John", "Fred", "Smith", "Sue", Green"
```
SelectMany is ideal for this task, because we’re mapping each input element to a variable number of output elements. All we must do is come up with a selector expression that converts each input element to a child sequence. string.Split does the job nicely: it takes a string and splits it into words, emitting the result as an array:
```c#
string testInputElement = "Anne Williams";
string[] childSequence  = testInputElement.Split();

// childSequence is { "Anne", "Williams" };
So, here’s our SelectMany query and the result:

IEnumerable<string> query = fullNames.SelectMany (name => name.Split());

foreach (string name in query)
  Console.Write (name + "|");  // Anne|Williams|John|Fred|Smith|Sue|Green|
```
`Note`:
If you replace SelectMany with Select, you get the same results in hierarchical form. The following emits a sequence of string arrays, requiring nested foreach statements to enumerate:
```c#
IEnumerable<string[]> query =
  fullNames.Select (name => name.Split());

foreach (string[] stringArray in query)
  foreach (string name in stringArray)
    Console.Write (name + "|");
```
`The benefit of SelectMany is that it yields a single flat result sequence.`
# Benefit selectMany over nested forloop
Using SelectMany instead of nested loops in LINQ can provide several benefits:

`Improved Readability`: SelectMany provides a cleaner and more concise way to express a nested loop, making the code easier to read and understand.

`Improved Performance`: In some cases, SelectMany can perform better than nested loops, especially when working with large datasets. This is because SelectMany uses deferred execution and lazy loading, which can reduce memory consumption and improve performance.

`Simplified Code Maintenance`: By using SelectMany, the code becomes more modular and easier to maintain. Changes can be made to the query without having to modify multiple nested loops.

`Enhanced Flexibility`: SelectMany allows for more complex queries to be constructed, including multiple levels of nesting and filtering, which can be difficult to achieve with traditional nested loops.

Overall, using SelectMany can lead to more efficient and maintainable code, and can simplify complex queries.

`SelectMany` is supported in query syntax and is invoked by having an additional generator—in other words, an extra from clause in the query. The from keyword has two meanings in query syntax. At the start of a query, it introduces the original range variable and input sequence. `Anywhere else in the query, it translates to SelectMany`. Here’s our query in query syntax:
```c#
IEnumerable<string> query =
  from fullName in fullNames
  from name in fullName.Split()     // Translates to SelectMany
  select name;
```
Note that the additional generator introduces a new range variable—in this case, name. The old range variable stays in scope, however, and we can subsequently access both.

# Multiple range variables
In the preceding example, both name and fullName remain in scope until the query either ends or reaches an into clause. The extended scope of these variables is the killer scenario for query syntax over fluent syntax.

To illustrate, we can take the preceding query and include fullName in the final projection:

IEnumerable<string> query =
  from fullName in fullNames
  from name in fullName.Split()
  select name + " came from " + fullName;

Anne came from Anne Williams
Williams came from Anne Williams
John came from John Fred Smith
...
Behind the scenes, the compiler must pull some tricks to let you access both variables. A good way to appreciate this is to try writing the same query in fluent syntax. It’s tricky! It becomes yet more difficult if you insert a where or orderby clause before projecting:

from fullName in fullNames
from name in fullName.Split()
orderby fullName, name
select name + " came from " + fullName;
The problem is that SelectMany emits a flat sequence of child elements—in our case, a flat collection of words. The original “outer” element from which it came (fullName) is lost. The solution is to “carry” the outer element with each child, in a temporary anonymous type:

from fullName in fullNames
from x in fullName.Split().Select (name => new { name, fullName } )
orderby x.fullName, x.name
select x.name + " came from " + x.fullName;
The only change here is that we’re wrapping each child element (name) in an anonymous type that also contains its fullName. This is similar to how a let clause is resolved. Here’s the final conversion to fluent syntax:

IEnumerable<string> query = fullNames
  .SelectMany (fName => fName.Split()
                             .Select (name => new { name, fName } ))
  .OrderBy (x => x.fName)
  .ThenBy  (x => x.name)
  .Select  (x => x.name + " came from " + x.fName);

# Thinking in query syntax
As we just demonstrated, there are good reasons to use query syntax if you need multiple range variables. In such cases, it helps to not only use query syntax but also to think directly in its terms.

There are two basic patterns when writing additional generators. The first is expanding and flattening subsequences. To do this, you call a property or method on an existing range variable in your additional generator. We did this in the previous example:

from fullName in fullNames
from name in fullName.Split()
Here, we’ve expanded from enumerating full names to enumerating words. An analogous EF Core query is when you expand collection navigation properties. The following query lists all customers along with their purchases:

IEnumerable<string> query = from c in dbContext.Customers
                            from p in c.Purchases
                            select c.Name + " bought a " + p.Description;


Tom bought a Bike
Tom bought a Holiday
Dick bought a Phone
Harry bought a Car
...
Here, we’ve expanded each customer into a subsequence of purchases.

The second pattern is performing a cartesian product, or cross join, in which every element of one sequence is matched with every element of another. To do this, introduce a generator whose selector expression returns a sequence unrelated to a range variable:

int[] numbers = { 1, 2, 3 };  string[] letters = { "a", "b" };

IEnumerable<string> query = from n in numbers
                            from l in letters
                            select n.ToString() + l;

// RESULT: { "1a", "1b", "2a", "2b", "3a", "3b" }
This style of query is the basis of SelectMany-style joins.

Joining with SelectMany
You can use SelectMany to join two sequences simply by filtering the results of a cross product. For instance, suppose that we want to match players for a game. We could start as follows:

string[] players = { "Tom", "Jay", "Mary" };

IEnumerable<string> query = from name1 in players
                            from name2 in players
                            select name1 + " vs " + name2;

//RESULT: { "Tom vs Tom", "Tom vs Jay", "Tom vs Mary",
//          "Jay vs Tom", "Jay vs Jay", "Jay vs Mary",
//          "Mary vs Tom", "Mary vs "Jay", "Mary vs Mary" }
The query reads “For every player, reiterate every player, selecting player 1 versus player 2.” Although we got what we asked for (a cross join), the results are not useful until we add a filter:

IEnumerable<string> query = from name1 in players
                            from name2 in players
                            where name1.CompareTo (name2) < 0
                            orderby name1, name2
                            select name1 + " vs " + name2;

//RESULT: { "Jay vs Mary", "Jay vs Tom", "Mary vs Tom" }
The filter predicate constitutes the join condition. Our query can be called a non-equi join because the join condition doesn’t use an equality operator.

# SelectMany in EF Core
SelectMany in EF Core can perform cross joins, non-equi joins, inner joins, and left outer joins. You can use SelectMany with both predefined associations and ad hoc relationships—just as with Select. The difference is that SelectMany returns a flat rather than a hierarchical result set.

An EF Core cross join is written just as in the preceding section. The following query matches every customer to every purchase (a cross join):

var query = from c in dbContext.Customers
            from p in dbContext.Purchases
            select c.Name + " might have bought a " + p.Description;
More typically, though, you’d want to match customers to only their own purchases. You achieve this by adding a where clause with a joining predicate. This results in a standard SQL-style equi-join:

var query = from c in dbContext.Customers
            from p in dbContext.Purchases
            where c.ID == p.CustomerID
            select c.Name + " bought a " + p.Description;
NOTE
This translates well to SQL. In the next section, we see how it extends to support outer joins. Reformulating such queries with LINQ’s Join operator actually makes them less extensible—LINQ is opposite to SQL in this sense.

If you have collection navigation properties in your entities, you can express the same query by expanding the subcollection instead of filtering the cross product:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases
select new { c.Name, p.Description };
The advantage is that we’ve eliminated the joining predicate. We’ve gone from filtering a cross product to expanding and flattening.

You can add where clauses to such a query for additional filtering. For instance, if we want only customers whose names started with “T”, we could filter as follows:

from c in dbContext.Customers
where c.Name.StartsWith ("T")
from p in c.Purchases
select new { c.Name, p.Description };
This EF Core query would work equally well if the where clause were moved one line down because the same SQL is generated in both cases. If it is a local query, however, moving the where clause down would make it less efficient. With local queries, you should filter before joining.

You can introduce new tables into the mix with additional from clauses. For instance, if each purchase had purchase item child rows, you could produce a flat result set of customers with their purchases, each with their purchase detail lines as follows:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases
from pi in p.PurchaseItems
select new { c.Name, p.Description, pi.Detail };
Each from clause introduces a new child table. To include data from a parent table (via a navigation property), you don’t add a from clause—you simply navigate to the property. For example, if each customer has a salesperson whose name you want to query, just do this:

from c in dbContext.Customers
select new { Name = c.Name, SalesPerson = c.SalesPerson.Name };
You don’t use SelectMany in this case because there’s no subcollection to flatten. Parent navigation properties return a single item.

# Outer joins with SelectMany
We saw previously that a Select subquery yields a result analogous to a left outer join:

from c in dbContext.Customers
select new {
             c.Name,
             Purchases = from p in c.Purchases
                         where p.Price > 1000
                         select new { p.Description, p.Price }
           };
In this example, every outer element (customer) is included, regardless of whether the customer has any purchases. But suppose that we rewrite this query with SelectMany so that we can obtain a single flat collection rather than a hierarchical result set:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases
where p.Price > 1000
select new { c.Name, p.Description, p.Price };
In the process of flattening the query, we’ve switched to an inner join: customers are now included only for whom one or more high-value purchases exist. To get a left outer join with a flat result set, we must apply the DefaultIfEmpty query operator on the inner sequence. This method returns a sequence with a single null element if its input sequence has no elements. Here’s such a query, price predicate aside:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases.DefaultIfEmpty()
select new { c.Name, p.Description, Price = (decimal?) p.Price };
This works perfectly with EF Core, returning all customers—even if they have no purchases. But if we were to run this as a local query, it would crash because when p is null, p.Description and p.Price throw a NullReferenceException. We can make our query robust in either scenario, as follows:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases.DefaultIfEmpty()
select new {
             c.Name,
             Descript = p == null ? null : p.Description,
             Price = p == null ? (decimal?) null : p.Price
           };
Let’s now reintroduce the price filter. We cannot use a where clause as we did before, because it would execute after DefaultIfEmpty:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases.DefaultIfEmpty()
where p.Price > 1000...
The correct solution is to splice the Where clause before DefaultIfEmpty with a subquery:

from c in dbContext.Customers
from p in c.Purchases.Where (p => p.Price > 1000).DefaultIfEmpty()
select new {
             c.Name,
             Descript = p == null ? null : p.Description,
             Price = p == null ? (decimal?) null : p.Price
           };
EF Core translates this to a left outer join. This is an effective pattern for writing such queries.

NOTE
If you’re used to writing outer joins in SQL, you might be tempted to overlook the simpler option of a Select subquery for this style of query in favor of the awkward but familiar SQL-centric flat approach. The hierarchical result set from a Select subquery is often better suited to outer join–style queries because there are no additional nulls to deal with.