# Reentrancy
A thread-safe method is sometimes called `reentrant`, because it can be preempted part way through its execution, and then called again on another thread without ill effect. In a general sense, the terms thread-safe and reentrant are considered either synonymous or closely related.

Reentrancy, however, has another more sinister connotation in automatic locking regimes. If the Synchronization attribute is applied with the reentrant argument true:
```c#
[Synchronization(true)]
```
then the synchronization context's lock will be temporarily released when execution leaves the context. In the previous example, this would prevent the deadlock from occurring; obviously desirable. However, a side effect is that during this interim, any thread is free to call any method on the original object ("re-entering" the synchronization context) and unleashing the very complications of multithreading one is trying to avoid in the first place. This is the problem of reentrancy.
`Note`: Because [Synchronization(true)] is applied at a class-level, this attribute turns every out-of-context method call made by the class into a Trojan for reentrancy.

While `reentrancy` can be dangerous, there are sometimes few other options. For instance, suppose one was to implement multithreading internally within a synchronized class, by delegating the logic to workers running objects in separate contexts. These workers may be unreasonably hindered in communicating with each other or the original object without reentrancy.

This highlights a fundamental weakness with automatic synchronization: the extensive scope over which locking is applied can actually manufacture difficulties that may never have otherwise arisen. These difficulties — deadlocking, reentrancy, and emasculated concurrency — can make manual locking more palatable in anything other than simple scenarios.