# Writing a responsive user interface
In Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF), mobile, and Windows Forms applications, you must run time-consuming tasks concurrently with the code that runs your user interface to maintain responsiveness.
# Allowing requests to process simultaneously
On a server, client requests can arrive concurrently and so must be handled in parallel to maintain scalability. If you use ASP.NET Core or Web API, the runtime does this for you automatically. However, you still need to be aware of shared state (for instance, the effect of using static variables for caching).
# Parallel programming
Code that performs intensive calculations can execute faster on multicore/mul‐ tiprocessor computers if the workload is divided between cores (Chapter 22 is dedicated to this).
# Speculative execution
On multicore machines, you can sometimes improve performance by predict‐ ing something that might need to be done and then doing it ahead of time. LINQPad uses this technique to speed up the creation of new queries. A variation is to run a number of different algorithms in parallel that all solve the same task. Whichever one finishes first “wins”—this is effective when you can’t know ahead of time which algorithm will execute fastest.
The general mechanism by which a program can simultaneously execute code is called multithreading. Multithreading is supported by both the CLR and operating system, and is a fundamental concept in concurrency. Understanding the basics of threading, and in particular the effects of threads on shared state, is therefore essential.