# Ending Application Domains
Another way to implement an abort-friendly worker is by having its thread run in its own application domain. After calling Abort, you tear down and recreate the application domain. This takes care of bad state caused by partial or improper initialization (although unfortunately it doesn't guarantee protection against the worst-case scenario described above — aborting StreamWriter's constructor may still leak an unmanaged handle).

Strictly speaking, the first step — aborting the thread — is unnecessary, because when an application domain is unloaded, all threads executing code in that domain are automatically aborted. However, the disadvantage of relying on this behavior is that if the aborted threads don’t exit in a timely fashion (perhaps due to code in finally blocks, or for other reasons discussed previously) the application domain will not unload, and a CannotUnloadAppDomainException will be thrown on the caller. For this reason, it’s better to explicitly abort the worker thread, then call Join with some timeout (over which you have control) before unloading the application domain.

Creating and destroying an application domain is relatively time-consuming in the world of threading activities (taking a few milliseconds) so it’s something conducive to being done irregularly rather than in a loop! Also, the separation introduced by the application domain introduces another element that can be either of benefit or detriment, depending on what the multi-threaded program is setting out to achieve. In a unit-testing context, for instance, running threads on separate application domains is of benefit.

# Ending Processes
Another way in which a thread can end is when the parent process terminates. One example of this is when a worker thread’s IsBackground property is set to true, and the main thread finishes while the worker is still running. The background thread is unable to keep the application alive, and so the process terminates, taking the background thread with it.

When a thread terminates because of its parent process, it stops dead, and no finally blocks are executed.

The same situation arises when a user terminates an unresponsive application via the Windows Task Manager, or a process is killed programmatically via Process.Kill.