# Thread Priority
A thread’s Priority property determines how much execution time it is allotted relative to other active threads in the OS, on the following scale:
```c#
    enum ThreadPriority { Lowest, BelowNormal, Normal, AboveNormal, Highest }
```
This becomes relevant when multiple threads are simultaneously active.` You need to take care when elevating a thread’s priority because it can starve other threads`
If you want a thread to have higher priority than threads in other processes, you must also elevate the process priority using the Process class in System.Diagnostics:

```c#
 using Process p = Process.GetCurrentProcess();
    p.PriorityClass = ProcessPriorityClass.High;
```

This can work well for non-UI processes that do minimal work and need low latency (the ability to respond very quickly) in the work they do. With compute- hungry applications (particularly those with a user interface), elevating process priority can starve other processes, slowing down the entire computer.

By setting the priority class to "High", the operating system will give more CPU time to the threads in the process, which can improve the responsiveness of the application. However, setting the priority too high can also cause other processes on the system to be starved of CPU time, leading to a decrease in overall system performance. Therefore, it is important to use this feature judiciously and only when necessary.

`Note`: Think carefully before elevating a thread’s priority — it can lead to problems such as resource starvation for other threads.
# Caveats
`ProcessPriorityClass.High` is actually one notch short of the highest priority: Realtime. Setting a process priority to Realtime instructs the OS that you never want the process to yield CPU time to another process. If your program enters an accidental infinite loop, you might find even the operating system locked out, with nothing short of the power button left to rescue you! For this reason, `High is usually the best choice for real-time applications`.

If your `real-time application `has a user interface, elevating the process priority gives screen updates excessive CPU time, slowing down the entire computer (particularly if the UI is complex). Lowering the main thread’s priority in conjunction with raising the process’s priority ensures that the real-time thread doesn’t get preempted by screen redraws, but doesn’t solve the problem of starving other applications of CPU time, because the operating system will still allocate disproportionate resources to the process as a whole.

An `ideal solution is to have the real-time worker and user interface` run as separate applications with different process priorities, communicating via Remoting or memory-mapped files. 

Even with an elevated process priority, there’s a limit to the suitability of the managed environment in handling hard real-time requirements. In addition to the issues of latency introduced by automatic garbage collection, the operating system may present additional challenges — even for unmanaged applications — that are best solved with dedicated hardware or a specialized real-time platform.