# Managed Memory Leaks
In unmanaged languages such as C++, you must remember to manually deallocate memory when an object is no longer required; otherwise, a memory leak will result. In the managed world, this kind of error is impossible due to the CLR’s automatic garbage collection system.

Nonetheless, large and complex .NET applications can exhibit a milder form of the same syndrome with the same end result: the application consumes more and more memory over its lifetime, until it eventually must be restarted. The good news is that managed memory leaks are usually easier to diagnose and prevent.

Managed memory leaks are caused by unused objects remaining alive by virtue of unused or forgotten references. A common candidate is event handlers—these hold a reference to the target object (unless the target is a static method). For instance, consider the following classes:

class Host
{
  public event EventHandler Click;
}

class Client
{
  Host _host;
  public Client (Host host)
  {
    _host = host;
    _host.Click += HostClicked;
  }

  void HostClicked (object sender, EventArgs e) { ... }
}
The following test class contains a method that instantiates 1,000 clients:

class Test
{
  static Host _host = new Host();

  public static void CreateClients()
  {
    Client[] clients = Enumerable.Range (0, 1000)
     .Select (i => new Client (_host))
     .ToArray();

    // Do something with clients ... 
  }
}
You might expect that after CreateClients finishes executing, the 1,000 Client objects will become eligible for collection. Unfortunately, each client has another referee: the _host object whose Click event now references each Client instance. This can go unnoticed if the Click event doesn’t fire—or if the HostClicked method doesn’t do anything to attract attention.

One way to solve this is to make Client implement IDisposable and, in the Dispose method, unhook the event handler:

public void Dispose() { _host.Click -= HostClicked; }
Consumers of Client then dispose of the instances when they’re done with them:

Array.ForEach (clients, c => c.Dispose());
NOTE
In “Weak References”, we describe another solution to this problem, which can be useful in environments that tend not to use disposable objects (an example is Windows Presentation Foundation [WPF]). In fact, WPF offers a class called WeakEventManager that uses a pattern that employs weak references.

# Timers
Forgotten timers can also cause memory leaks (we discuss timers in Chapter 21). There are two distinct scenarios, depending on the kind of timer. Let’s first look at the timer in the System.Timers namespace. In the following example, the Foo class (when instantiated) calls the tmr_Elapsed method once every second:

using System.Timers;

class Foo
{
  Timer _timer;
  
  Foo() 
  {
    _timer = new System.Timers.Timer { Interval = 1000 };
    _timer.Elapsed += tmr_Elapsed;
    _timer.Start();
  }

  void tmr_Elapsed (object sender, ElapsedEventArgs e) { ... }
}
Unfortunately, instances of Foo can never be garbage collected! The problem is that the runtime itself holds references to active timers so that it can fire their Elapsed events; hence:

The runtime will keep _timer alive.

_timer will keep the Foo instance alive, via the tmr_Elapsed event handler.

The solution is obvious when you realize that Timer implements IDisposable. Disposing of the timer stops it and ensures that the runtime no longer references the object:

class Foo : IDisposable
{
  ...
  public void Dispose() { _timer.Dispose(); }
}
NOTE
A good guideline is to implement IDisposable yourself if any field in your class is assigned an object that implements IDisposable.

The WPF and Windows Forms timers behave in the same way with respect to what’s just been discussed.

The timer in the System.Threading namespace, however, is special. .NET doesn’t hold references to active threading timers; it instead references the callback delegates directly. This means that if you forget to dispose of a threading timer, a finalizer can fire that will automatically stop and dispose of the timer:

static void Main()
{
  var tmr = new System.Threading.Timer (TimerTick, null, 1000, 1000);
  GC.Collect();
  System.Threading.Thread.Sleep (10000);    // Wait 10 seconds 
}

static void TimerTick (object notUsed) { Console.WriteLine ("tick"); }
If this example is compiled in “release” mode (debugging disabled and optimizations enabled), the timer will be collected and finalized before it has a chance to fire even once! Again, we can fix this by disposing of the timer when we’re done with it:

using (var tmr = new System.Threading.Timer (TimerTick, null, 1000, 1000))
{
  GC.Collect();
  System.Threading.Thread.Sleep (10000);    // Wait 10 seconds 
}
The implicit call to tmr.Dispose at the end of the using block ensures that the tmr variable is “used” and so not considered dead by the GC until the end of the block. Ironically, this call to Dispose actually keeps the object alive longer!

# Diagnosing Memory Leaks
The easiest way to avoid managed memory leaks is to proactively monitor memory consumption as an application is written. You can obtain the current memory consumption of a program’s objects as follows (the true argument tells the GC to perform a collection first):

long memoryUsed = GC.GetTotalMemory (true);
If you’re practicing test-driven development, one possibility is to use unit tests to assert that memory is reclaimed as expected. If such an assertion fails, you then need examine only the changes that you’ve made recently.

If you already have a large application with a managed memory leak, the windbg.exe tool can assist in finding it. There are also friendlier graphical tools such as `Microsoft’s CLR Profiler, SciTech’s Memory Profiler, and Red Gate’s ANTS Memory Profiler.`

The CLR also exposes numerous event counters to assist with resource monitoring.