
# Continuations

A continuation says to a task, “When you’ve finished, continue by doing something else.” A continuation is usually implemented by a callback that executes once upon completion of an operation. There are two ways to attach a continuation to a task. The first is particularly significant because it’s used by C#’s asynchronous functions, as you’ll see soon. 
```c#
Task<int> primeNumberTask = Task.Run (async () =>
 {
  await Task.Delay(5000);
  return Enumerable.Range(2, 3000000).Count(n =>
   Enumerable.Range(2, (int)Math.Sqrt(n) - 1).All(i => n % i > 0));
 }
);

var awaiter = primeNumberTask.GetAwaiter();
awaiter.OnCompleted (() =>
{
 Console.WriteLine("Get result");
 int result = awaiter.GetResult();
 Console.WriteLine (result);       // Writes result
});

```
Calling GetAwaiter on the task returns an awaiter object whose OnCompleted method tells the antecedent task (primeNumberTask) to execute a delegate when it finishes (or faults). It’s valid to attach a continuation to an already-completed task, in which case the continuation will be scheduled to execute right away.
```c#
Task<int> antecedent = Task.Run(() => { throw new Exception("Antecedent faulted.");
 return 1;
});
Task continuation = antecedent.ContinueWith(task =>
{
 // var a = task.GetAwaiter().GetResult();
 Console.WriteLine($"Continuation ran with result {task.Exception}.");
});
```

If a synchronization context is present, OnCompleted automatically captures it and posts the continuation to that context. This is very useful in rich client applications because it bounces the continuation back to the UI thread. In writing libraries, how‐ ever, it’s not usually desirable because the relatively expensive UI-thread-bounce should occur just once upon leaving the library rather than between method calls. Hence, you can defeat it by using the `ConfigureAwait` method:
```c#
    var awaiter = primeNumberTask.ConfigureAwait (false).GetAwaiter();
```
`If no synchronization context is present—or you use ConfigureAwait(false)—the continuation will (in general) execute on the same thread as the antecedent, avoiding unnecessary overhead.`
The other way to attach a continuation is by calling the task’s ContinueWith method:
```c#
    primeNumberTask.ContinueWith (antecedent =>
    {
int result = antecedent.Result;
      Console.WriteLine (result);          // Writes 123
    });
```

```c#
Task<int> firstTask = Task.Run(async () =>
{
 Console.WriteLine("Running first task on thread " + Thread.CurrentThread.ManagedThreadId);
 await Task.Delay(4000);
 return 42;
});

Task<string> secondTask = firstTask.ContinueWith(previousTask =>
{
 Console.WriteLine("Running second task on thread " + Thread.CurrentThread.ManagedThreadId);
 int result = previousTask.Result;
 return "The answer is " + result.ToString();
});

Console.WriteLine("Main thread continues to execute other tasks...");

//OUTPUT
Main thread continues to execute other tasks...
Running first task on thread 6
Running second task on thread 8
The answer is 42

```
ContinueWith itself returns a Task, which is useful if you want to attach further continuations. However, you must deal directly with AggregateException if the task faults, and write extra code to marshal the continuation in UI applications (see “Task Schedulers” on page 939). And in non-UI contexts, you must specify TaskContinuationOptions.ExecuteSynchronously if you want the continuation to execute on the same thread; otherwise it will bounce to the thread pool. Continue With is particularly useful in parallel programming scenarios;