# nterrupt and Abort
All blocking methods (such as Sleep, Join, EndInvoke, and Wait) block forever if the unblocking condition is never met and no timeout is specified. Occasionally, it can be useful to release a blocked thread prematurely; for instance, when ending an application. Two methods accomplish this:

Thread.Interrupt
Thread.Abort
The Abort method is also capable of ending a nonblocked thread — stuck, perhaps, in an infinite loop. Abort is occasionally useful in niche scenarios; Interrupt is almost never needed.

Interrupt and Abort can cause considerable trouble: it’s precisely because they seem like obvious choices in solving a range of problems that it’s worth examining their pitfalls.

# nterrupt
Calling Interrupt on a blocked thread forcibly releases it, throwing a ThreadInterruptedException, as follows:

static void Main()
{
  Thread t = new Thread (delegate()
  {
    try { Thread.Sleep (Timeout.Infinite); }
    catch (ThreadInterruptedException) { Console.Write ("Forcibly "); }
    Console.WriteLine ("Woken!");
  });
  t.Start();
  t.Interrupt();
}
Forcibly Woken!
Interrupting a thread does not cause the thread to end, unless the ThreadInterruptedException is unhandled.

If Interrupt is called on a thread that’s not blocked, the thread continues executing until it next blocks, at which point a ThreadInterruptedException is thrown. This avoids the need for the following test:

if ((worker.ThreadState & ThreadState.WaitSleepJoin) > 0)
  worker.Interrupt();
which is not thread-safe because of the possibility of preemption between the if statement and worker.Interrupt.

`Interrupting a thread arbitrarily is dangerous, however, because any framework or third-party methods in the calling stack could unexpectedly receive the interrupt rather than your intended code.` All it would take is for the thread to block briefly on a simple lock or synchronization resource, and any pending interruption would kick in. If the method isn’t designed to be interrupted (with appropriate cleanup code in finally blocks), objects could be left in an unusable state or resources incompletely released.

Moreover, Interrupt is unnecessary: if you are writing the code that blocks, you can achieve the same result more safely with a signaling construct — or Framework 4.0’s cancellation tokens. And if you want to “unblock” someone else’s code, Abort is nearly always more useful.

# Abort
A blocked thread can also be forcibly released via its Abort method. This has an effect similar to calling Interrupt, except that a ThreadAbortException is thrown instead of a ThreadInterruptedException. Furthermore, the exception will be rethrown at the end of the catch block (in an attempt to terminate the thread for good) unless Thread.ResetAbort is called within the catch block. In the interim, the thread has a ThreadState of AbortRequested.

An unhandled ThreadAbortException is one of only two types of exception that does not cause application shutdown (the other is AppDomainUnloadException).

The big difference between Interrupt and Abort is what happens when it’s called on a thread that is not blocked. Whereas Interrupt waits until the thread next blocks before doing anything, Abort throws an exception on the thread right where it’s executing (unmanaged code excepted). This is a problem because .NET Framework code might be aborted — code that is not abort-safe. For example, if an abort occurs while a FileStream is being constructed, it’s possible that an unmanaged file handle will remain open until the application domain ends. This rules out using Abort in almost any nontrivial context.

For more detail on why Abort is unsafe, see Aborting Threads in Part 4.

There are two cases, though, where you can safely use Abort. One is if you are willing to tear down a thread’s application domain after it is aborted. A good example of when you might do this is in writing a unit-testing framework. Another case where you can call Abort safely is on your own thread (because you know exactly where you are). Aborting your own thread throws an “unswallowable” exception: one that gets rethrown after each catch block. ASP.NET does exactly this when you call Redirect.

# Safe Cancellation
As we saw in the preceding section, calling Abort on a thread is dangerous in most scenarios. The alternative, then, is to implement a cooperative pattern whereby the worker periodically checks a flag that indicates whether it should abort (like in BackgroundWorker). To cancel, the instigator simply sets the flag, and then waits for the worker to comply. This BackgroundWorker helper class implements such a flag-based cancellation pattern, and you easily implement one yourself.

The obvious disadvantage is that the worker method must be written explicitly to support cancellation. Nonetheless, this is one of the few safe cancellation patterns. To illustrate this pattern, we’ll first write a class to encapsulate the cancellation flag:
```c#
class RulyCanceler
{
  object _cancelLocker = new object();
  bool _cancelRequest;
  public bool IsCancellationRequested
  {
    get { lock (_cancelLocker) return _cancelRequest; }
  }
 
  public void Cancel() { lock (_cancelLocker) _cancelRequest = true; } 
 
  public void ThrowIfCancellationRequested()
  {
    if (IsCancellationRequested) throw new OperationCanceledException();
  }
}
```
OperationCanceledException is a Framework type intended for just this purpose. Any exception class will work just as well, though.

We can use this as follows:
```c#
class Test
{
  static void Main()
  {
    var canceler = new RulyCanceler();
    new Thread (() => {
                        try { Work (canceler); }
                        catch (OperationCanceledException)
                        {
                          Console.WriteLine ("Canceled!");
                        }
                      }).Start();
    Thread.Sleep (1000);
    canceler.Cancel();               // Safely cancel worker.
  }
 
  static void Work (RulyCanceler c)
  {
    while (true)
    {
      c.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();
      // ...
      try      { OtherMethod (c); }
      finally  { /* any required cleanup */ }
    }
  }
 
  static void OtherMethod (RulyCanceler c)
  {
    // Do stuff...
    c.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();
  }
}

```

We could simplify our example by eliminating the RulyCanceler class and adding the static boolean field _cancelRequest to the Test class. However, doing so would mean that if several threads called Work at once, setting _cancelRequest to true would cancel all workers. Our RulyCanceler class is therefore a useful abstraction. Its only inelegance is that when we look at the Work method’s signature, the intention is unclear:

static void Work (RulyCanceler c)
Might the Work method itself intend to call Cancel on the RulyCanceler object? In this instance, the answer is no, so it would be nice if this could be enforced in the type system. Framework 4.0 provides cancellation tokens for this exact purpose.

# Cancellation Tokens
Framework 4.0 provides two types that formalize the cooperative cancellation pattern that we just demonstrated: CancellationTokenSource and CancellationToken. The two types work in tandem:

A CancellationTokenSource defines a Cancel method.
A CancellationToken defines an IsCancellationRequested property and ThrowIfCancellationRequested method.
Together, these amount to a more sophisticated version of the RulyCanceler class in our previous example. But because the types are separate, you can isolate the ability to cancel from the ability to check the cancellation flag.

To use these types, first instantiate a CancellationTokenSource object:

var cancelSource = new CancellationTokenSource();
Then, pass its Token property into a method for which you’d like to support cancellation:
```c#
new Thread (() => Work (cancelSource.Token)).Start();
Here’s how Work would be defined:

void Work (CancellationToken cancelToken)
{
  cancelToken.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();
  ...
}
```
When you want to cancel, simply call Cancel on cancelSource.

CancellationToken is actually a struct, although you can treat it like a class. When implicitly copied, the copies behave identically and reference the original CancellationTokenSource.

The CancellationToken struct provides two additional useful members. The first is WaitHandle, which returns a wait handle that’s signaled when the token is canceled. The second is Register, which lets you register a callback delegate that will be fired upon cancellation.

`Cancellation tokens` are used within the .NET Framework itself, most notably in the following classes:

  - `ManualResetEventSlim and SemaphoreSlim`
  - `CountdownEvent`
  - `Barrier`
  - `BlockingCollection`
  - `PLINQ` and the `Task Parallel Library`
Most of these classes’ use of cancellation tokens is in their Wait methods. For example, if you Wait on a ManualResetEventSlim and specify a cancellation token, another thread can Cancel its wait. This is much tidier and safer than calling Interrupt on the blocked thread.