# Threading’s Uses and Misuses
Multithreading has many uses; here are the most common:

# Maintaining a responsive user interface
By running time-consuming tasks on a parallel “worker” thread, the main UI thread is free to continue processing keyboard and mouse events.
# Making efficient use of an otherwise blocked CPU
Multithreading is useful when a thread is awaiting a response from another computer or piece of hardware. While one thread is blocked while performing the task, other threads can take advantage of the otherwise unburdened computer.
# Parallel programming
Code that performs intensive calculations can execute faster on multicore or multiprocessor computers if the workload is shared among multiple threads in a “divide-and-conquer” strategy (see Part 5).
# Speculative execution
On multicore machines, you can sometimes improve performance by predicting something that might need to be done, and then doing it ahead of time. LINQPad uses this technique to speed up the creation of new queries. A variation is to run a number of different algorithms in parallel that all solve the same task. Whichever one finishes first “wins” — this is effective when you can’t know ahead of time which algorithm will execute fastest.
# Allowing requests to be processed simultaneously
On a server, client requests can arrive concurrently and so need to be handled in parallel (the .NET Framework creates threads for this automatically if you use ASP.NET, WCF, Web Services, or Remoting). This can also be useful on a client (e.g., handling peer-to-peer networking — or even multiple requests from the user).

# Ceavats
With technologies such as ASP.NET and WCF, you may be unaware that multithreading is even taking place — unless you access shared data (perhaps via static fields) without appropriate locking, running afoul of thread safety.

Threads also come with strings attached. The biggest is that multithreading can increase complexity. Having lots of threads does not in and of itself create much complexity; it’s the interaction between threads (typically via shared data) that does.

`Threading` also incurs a resource and CPU cost in scheduling and switching threads (when there are more active threads than CPU cores) — and there’s also a creation/tear-down cost. `Multithreading` will not always speed up your application — it can even slow it down if used excessively or inappropriately. For example, when heavy disk I/O is involved, it can be faster to have a couple of worker threads run tasks in sequence than to have 10 threads executing at once.