# Cancellation
It’s often important to be able to cancel a concurrent operation after it’s started, perhaps in response to a user request. A simple way to implement this is with a cancellation flag, which we could encapsulate by writing a class like this:
```c#
class CancellationToken {
      public bool IsCancellationRequested { get; private set; }
      public void Cancel() { IsCancellationRequested = true; }
      public void ThrowIfCancellationRequested()
      {
        if (IsCancellationRequested)
          throw new OperationCanceledException();
} }
```
We could then write a cancellable asynchronous method as follows:
```c#
async Task Foo (CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
 for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  Console.WriteLine (i);
  await Task.Delay (1000);
  cancellationToken.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();
 } 
}

await Foo(new CancellationToken(true));
```
When the caller wants to cancel, it calls Cancel on the cancellation token that it passed into Foo. This sets IsCancellationRequested to true, which causes Foo to fault a short time later with an `OperationCanceledException` (a predefined exception in the System namespace designed for this purpose).

Thread-safety aside (we should be locking around reading/writing IsCancellation Requested), this pattern is effective, and the CLR provides a type called Cancella tionToken that is very similar to what we’ve just shown. However, it lacks a Cancel method; this method is instead exposed on another type called CancellationToken Source. This separation provides some security: a method that has access only to a CancellationToken object can check for but not initiate cancellation.
To get a cancellation token, we first instantiate a CancellationTokenSource: var cancelSource = new CancellationTokenSource();
This exposes a Token property, which returns a CancellationToken. Hence, we could call our Foo method, as follows:
```c#
    var cancelSource = new CancellationTokenSource();
    Task foo = Foo (cancelSource.Token);
    ... (sometime later) cancelSource.Cancel();
```
Most asynchronous methods in the CLR support cancellation tokens, including Delay. If we modify Foo such that it passes its token into the Delay method, the task will end immediately upon request (rather than up to a second later):
```c#
async Task Foo (CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        Console.WriteLine (i);
await Task.Delay (1000, cancellationToken); }
}
```

Notice that we no longer need to call ThrowIfCancellationRequested because Task.Delay is doing that for us. Cancellation tokens propagate nicely down the call stack (just as cancellation requests cascade up the call stack, by virtue of being exceptions).

Synchronous methods can support cancellation, too (such as Task’s Wait method). In such cases, the instruction to cancel will need to come asynchronously (e.g., from another task). For example:
```c#
    var cancelSource = new CancellationTokenSource();
    Task.Delay (5000).ContinueWith (ant => cancelSource.Cancel());
    ```

In fact, you can specify a time interval when constructing CancellationToken Source to initiate cancellation after a set period of time (just as we demonstrated). It’s useful for implementing timeouts, whether synchronous or asynchronous:
```c#
var cancelSource = new CancellationTokenSource (5000);
try { await Foo (cancelSource.Token); }
catch (OperationCanceledException ex) { Console.WriteLine ("Cancelled"); }
```