# Querying IAsyncEnumerable<T>
The System.Linq.Async NuGet package defines LINQ query operators that operate over IAsyncEnumerable<T>, allowing you to write queries much as you would with IEnumerable<T>.

For instance, we can write a LINQ query over the RangeAsync method that we defined in the preceding section, as follows:
IAsyncEnumerable<int> query =
from i in RangeAsync (0, 10, 500)
where i % 2 == 0 // Even numbers only. select i * 10; // Multiply by 10.
await foreach (var number in query) Console.WriteLine (number);
This outputs 0, 20, 40, and so on.
If you’re familiar with Rx, you can benefit from its (more powerful) query operators, too, by calling the ToObservable extension method, which converts an IAsyncEnumerable<T> into an IObservable<T>. A ToAsyncEnumerable extension method is also available, to convert in the reverse direction.

IAsyncEnumerable should be used when you need to consume a sequence of data asynchronously in a streaming fashion, i.e., when you need to process large amounts of data that are generated or obtained asynchronously, and you don't want to load all the data into memory at once.

IAsyncEnumerable is particularly useful when dealing with long-running, potentially infinite, streams of data, such as data coming from network connections or data being generated in real-time by sensors or other devices. It is also useful when dealing with data that is too large to fit into memory at once.

In general, you should use IAsyncEnumerable whenever you need to perform asynchronous operations on a sequence of data. Some specific scenarios where IAsyncEnumerable might be a good choice include:

`When querying a large database`: If you need to retrieve a large number of records from a database, IAsyncEnumerable can be used to stream the data in chunks, rather than loading all the data into memory at once.

`When processing large files:` If you need to read or write large files, IAsyncEnumerable can be used to stream the data in chunks, rather than loading all the data into memory at once.

`When consuming data from APIs`: If you need to consume data from a web API or other service, IAsyncEnumerable can be used to stream the data in chunks, rather than loading all the data into memory at once.

`When processing real-time data`: If you need to process real-time data, such as sensor data, IAsyncEnumerable can be used to stream the data in real-time, rather than waiting for all the data to be collected before processing it.

# IAsyncEnumerable<T> in ASP.Net Core
ASP.Net Core controller actions can now return IAsyncEnumerable<T>. Such meth‐ ods must be marked async. For example:

```c#
[HttpGet]
public async IAsyncEnumerable<string> Get() {
  using var dbContext = new BookContext();
await foreach (var title in dbContext.Books
   yield return title;

```

# Asynchronous Methods in WinRT
If you’re developing UWP applications, you will need to work with the WinRT types defined in the operating system. WinRT’s equivalent of Task is IAsyncAction, and the equivalent of Task<TResult> is IAsyncOperation<TResult>. And for operations that report progress, the equivalents are IAsyncActionWithProgress<TProgress> and IAsyncOperationWithProgress<TResult, TProgress>. They are all defined in the Windows.Foundation namespace.
You can convert from either into a Task or Task<TResult> via the AsTask extension method:
Task<StorageFile> fileTask = KnownFolders.DocumentsLibrary.CreateFileAsync ("test.txt").AsTask();
Or you can await them directly:
StorageFile file = await KnownFolders.DocumentsLibrary.CreateFileAsync ("test.txt");
Due to limitations in the COM type system, IAsyncAction WithProgress<TProgress> and IAsyncOperationWithPro gress<TResult, TProgress> are not based on IAsyncAction as you might expect. Instead, both inherit from a common base type called IAsyncInfo.
The AsTask method is also overloaded to accept a cancellation token (see “Cancella‐ tion” on page 659). It can also accept an IProgress<T> object when chained to the WithProgress variants (see “Progress Reporting” on page 661).
# Asynchrony and Synchronization Contexts
We’ve already seen how the presence of a synchronization context is significant in terms of posting continuations. There are a couple of other more subtle ways in which such synchronization contexts come into play with void-returning asyn‐ chronous functions. These are not a direct result of C# compiler expansions, but a function of the Async*MethodBuilder types in the System.CompilerServices namespace that the compiler uses in expanding asynchronous functions.
Exception posting
It’s common practice in rich-client applications to rely on the central exception handling event (Application.DispatcherUnhandledException in WPF) to pro‐ cess unhandled exceptions thrown on the UI thread. And in ASP.NET Core
.Select(b => b.Title)
.AsAsyncEnumerable())