# Semaphore
A semaphore is like a nightclub: it has a certain capacity, enforced by a bouncer. When the club is full, no more people can enter, and a queue builds up outside. Then, for each person who leaves, one person enters. The constructor requires a minimum of two arguments: the number of places currently available in the nightclub and the club’s total capacity.
A semaphore with a capacity of one is similar to a Mutex or lock, except that the semaphore has no “owner”—it’s thread agnostic. Any thread can call Release on a Semaphore, whereas with Mutex and lock, only the thread that obtained the lock can release it.

ere are two functionally similar versions of this class: Semaphore and SemaphoreSlim. The latter has been optimized to meet the low-latency demands of parallel programming. It’s also useful in traditional multithreading because it lets you specify a cancellation token when waiting (see “Cancella‐ tion” on page 659), and it exposes a WaitAsync method for asynchronous programming. You cannot use it, however, for interprocess signaling.
Semaphore incurs about one microsecond in calling WaitOne and Release; SemaphoreSlim incurs about one-tenth of that.
Semaphores can be useful in limiting concurrency—preventing too many threads from executing a particular piece of code at once. In the following example, five threads try to enter a nightclub that allows only three threads in at once:
    class TheClub      // No door lists!
    {
      static SemaphoreSlim _sem = new SemaphoreSlim (3);    // Capacity of 3
      static void Main()
      {
        for (int i = 1; i <= 5; i++) new Thread (Enter).Start (i);
      }
      static void Enter (object id)
      {
           Console.WriteLine (id + " wants to enter");
    _sem.Wait();
Console.WriteLine (id + " is in!"); Thread.Sleep (1000 * (int) id); Console.WriteLine (id + " is leaving"); _sem.Release();
} }
1 wants to enter
1 is in!
2 wants to enter
2 is in!
3 wants to enter
3 is in!
4 wants to enter
5 wants to enter
1 is leaving
4 is in!
2 is leaving
5 is in!
// Only three threads
// can be here at
// a time.

Asynchronous semaphores and locks
It is illegal to lock across an await statement:
    lock (_locker)
    {
      await Task.Delay (1000);    // Compilation error
... }
Doing so would make no sense, because locks are held by a thread, which typically changes when returning from an await. Locking also blocks, and blocking for a potentially long period of time is exactly what you’re not trying to achieve with asynchronous functions.
It’s still sometimes desirable, however, to make asynchronous operations execute sequentially—or limit the parallelism such that not more than n operations execute at once. For example, consider a web browser: it needs to perform asynchronous downloads in parallel, but it might want to impose a limit such that a maximum of 10 downloads happen at a time. We can achieve this by using a SemaphoreSlim:
    SemaphoreSlim _semaphore = new SemaphoreSlim (10);
    async Task<byte[]> DownloadWithSemaphoreAsync (string uri)
    {
await _semaphore.WaitAsync();
try { return await new WebClient().DownloadDataTaskAsync (uri); }
finally { _semaphore.Release(); } }
Reducing the semaphore’s initialCount to 1 reduces the maximum parallelism to 1, turning this into an asynchronous lock.

# Writing an EnterAsync extension method
The following extension method simplifies the asynchronous use of SemaphoreSlim by using the Disposable class that we wrote in “Anonymous Disposal” on page 561:
    public static async Task<IDisposable> EnterAsync (this SemaphoreSlim ss)
    {
await ss.WaitAsync().ConfigureAwait (false);
      return Disposable.Create (() => ss.Release());
    }
With this method, we can rewrite our DownloadWithSemaphoreAsync method as follows:
async Task<byte[]> DownloadWithSemaphoreAsync (string uri) {
using (await _semaphore.EnterAsync())
return await new WebClient().DownloadDataTaskAsync (uri);
}