# Reader/Writer Locks
Quite often, instances of a type are thread-safe for concurrent read operations, but not for concurrent updates (nor for a concurrent read and update). This can also be true with resources such as a file. Although protecting instances of such types with a simple exclusive lock for all modes of access usually does the trick, it can unreasonably restrict concurrency if there are many readers and just occasional updates. An example of where this could occur is in a business application server, for which commonly used data is cached for fast retrieval in static fields. The ReaderWriterLockSlim class is designed to provide maximum-availability locking in just this scenario.

`ReaderWriterLockSlim` is a replacement for the older “fat” ReaderWriterLock class. The latter is similar in functionality, but it is several times slower and has an inherent design fault in its mechanism for handling lock upgrades.
When compared to an ordinary lock (Monitor.Enter/Exit), ReaderWriterLockSlim is still twice as slow, though. The trade-off is less contention (when there’s a lot of reading and minimal writing).

With both classes, there are two basic kinds of lock—a read lock and a write lock:
• A write lock is universally exclusive.
• A read lock is compatible with other read locks.
So, a thread holding a write lock blocks all other threads trying to obtain a read or write lock (and vice versa). But if no thread holds a write lock, any number of threads may concurrently obtain a read lock.
ReaderWriterLockSlim defines the following methods for obtaining and releasing read/write locks:
    public void EnterReadLock();
    public void ExitReadLock();
    public void EnterWriteLock();
    public void ExitWriteLock();

Additionally, there are “Try” versions of all EnterXXX methods that accept timeout arguments in the style of Monitor.TryEnter (timeouts can occur quite easily if the resource is heavily contended). ReaderWriterLock provides similar methods, named AcquireXXX and ReleaseXXX. These throw an ApplicationException if a timeout occurs, rather than returning false.
The following program demonstrates ReaderWriterLockSlim. Three threads con‐ tinually enumerate a list, while two further threads append a random number to the list every 100 ms. A read lock protects the list readers, and a write lock protects the list writers:
```c#
class SlimDemo {
      static ReaderWriterLockSlim _rw = new ReaderWriterLockSlim();
static List<int> _items = new List<int>(); static Random _rand = new Random();
static void Main() {
new Thread (Read).Start(); new Thread (Read).Start(); new Thread (Read).Start();
   new Thread (Write).Start ("A");
        new Thread (Write).Start ("B");
      }
      static void Read()
      {
        while (true)
        {
          _rw.EnterReadLock();
          foreach (int i in _items) Thread.Sleep (10);
          _rw.ExitReadLock();
} }
      static void Write (object threadID)
      {
        while (true)
        {
          int newNumber = GetRandNum (100);
          _rw.EnterWriteLock();
          _items.Add (newNumber);
          _rw.ExitWriteLock();
          Console.WriteLine ("Thread " + threadID + " added " + newNumber);
          Thread.Sleep (100);
        }
}
      static int GetRandNum (int max) { lock (_rand) return _rand.Next(max); }
    }
```

`ReaderWriterLockSlim` allows more concurrent Read activity than a simple lock. We can illustrate this by inserting the following line in the Write method, at the start of the while loop:
    Console.WriteLine (_rw.CurrentReadCount + " concurrent readers");
This nearly always prints “3 concurrent readers” (the Read methods spend most of their time inside the foreach loops). As well as CurrentReadCount, ReaderWriter LockSlim provides the following properties for monitoring locks:
```c#
public bool IsReadLockHeld
    public bool IsUpgradeableReadLockHeld
    public bool IsWriteLockHeld
    public int  WaitingReadCount
    public int  WaitingUpgradeCount
    public int  WaitingWriteCount
    public int  RecursiveReadCount
    public int  RecursiveUpgradeCount
    public int  RecursiveWriteCount

```

Upgradeable locks
{ get; } { get; } { get; }
{ get; } { get; } { get; }
{ get; } { get; } { get; }
Sometimes, it’s useful to swap a read lock for a write lock in a single atomic operation. For instance, suppose that you want to add an item to a list only if the item wasn’t already present. Ideally, you’d want to minimize the time spent holding the (exclusive) write lock, so you might proceed as follows:
1. Obtain a read lock.
2. Test whether the item is already present in the list; if so, release the lock and
return.
3. Release the read lock. 4. Obtain a write lock. 5. Add the item.
The problem is that another thread could sneak in and modify the list (e.g., adding the same item) between Steps 3 and 4. ReaderWriterLockSlim addresses this through a third kind of lock called an upgradeable lock. An upgradeable lock is like a read lock except that it can later be promoted to a write lock in an atomic operation. Here’s how you use it:
1. CallEnterUpgradeableReadLock.
2. Perform read-based activities (e.g., test whether the item is already present in
the list).
3. Call EnterWriteLock (this converts the upgradeable lock to a write lock).
4. Perform write-based activities (e.g., add the item to the list).
5. Call ExitWriteLock (this converts the write lock back to an upgradeable lock). 6. Perform any other read-based activities.
7. CallExitUpgradeableReadLock.
From the caller’s perspective, it’s rather like nested or recursive locking. Function‐ ally, though, in Step 3, ReaderWriterLockSlim releases your read lock and obtains a fresh write lock, atomically.

There’s another important difference between upgradeable locks and read locks. Although an upgradeable lock can coexist with any number of read locks, only one upgradeable lock can itself be taken out at a time. This prevents conversion deadlocks by serializing competing conversions—just as update locks do in SQL Server: