# Passing Data to a Thread
Sometimes, you’ll want to pass arguments to the thread’s startup method. The easiest way to do this is with a lambda expression that calls the method with the desired arguments:
```c#
Thread t = new Thread ( () => Print ("Hello from t!") ); t.Start();
    void Print (string message) => Console.WriteLine (message);
```
With this approach, you can pass in any number of arguments to the method. You can even wrap the entire implementation in a multistatement lambda:
```c#
    new Thread (() =>
    {
      Console.WriteLine ("I'm running on another thread!");
Console.WriteLine ("This is so easy!"); }).Start();
```
An alternative (and less flexible) technique is to pass an argument into Thread’s Start method:
```c#
Thread t = new Thread (Print); t.Start ("Hello from t!");
void Print (object messageObj)
{
  string message = (string) messageObj;
Console.WriteLine (message); }
```
// We need to cast here
This works because Thread’s constructor is overloaded to accept either of two delegates:
    public delegate void ThreadStart();
    public delegate void ParameterizedThreadStart (object obj);

# Lambda expressions and captured variables
As we saw, a lambda expression is the most convenient and powerful way to pass data to a thread. However, you must be careful about accidentally modifying captured variables after starting the thread. For instance, consider the following:
```c#
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++)
      new Thread (() => Console.Write (i)).Start();
```
The output is nondeterministic! Here’s a typical result:
0223557799
The problem is that the i variable refers to the same memory location throughout the loop’s lifetime. Therefore, each thread calls Console.Write on a variable whose value can change as it is running! The solution is to use a temporary variable as follows:
```c#
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++)
    {
int temp = i;
      new Thread (() => Console.Write (temp)).Start();
    }
```
Each of the digits 0 to 9 is then written exactly once. (The ordering is still undefined because threads can start at indeterminate times.)

Variable temp is now local to each loop iteration. Therefore, each thread captures a different memory location and there’s no problem. We can illustrate the problem in the earlier code more simply with the following example:
```c#
    string text = "t1";
    Thread t1 = new Thread ( () => Console.WriteLine (text) );
    text = "t2";
    Thread t2 = new Thread ( () => Console.WriteLine (text) );
t1.Start(); t2.Start();
```
Because both lambda expressions capture the same text variable, t2 is printed twice.
