# Qualifiers

# `.` matches any character except a newline.
  - Example: `c.t` matches "cat", "cot", "cut", etc.
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("cut", "c.t"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("cat", "c.t"));  // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("cuut", "c.t"));  // False
```

# `^` matches the beginning of a line.
  - Example: `^abc` matches "abc" at the beginning of a string.

# `$` matches the end of a line.
  - Example: `xyz$` matches "xyz" at the end of a string.

# `*` matches zero or more occurrences of the previous character or group.
  - Example: `ab*c` matches "ac", "abc", "abbc", "abbbc", etc.
  - The `*` quantifier matches the preceding character or group zero or more times. The following matches `cv.docx`, along with any numbered versions of the same file (e.g., `cv2.docx, cv15.docx)`:
```c#
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cv55551.docx", @"cv5*1.docx").Success);  // True
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cv51.docx", @"cv5*1.docx").Success);     // True
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cv5aaa1.docx", @"cv5*1.docx").Success);  // False
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cv5a1.docx", @"cv5*1.docx").Success);    // False
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cv1.docx", @"cv5*1.docx").Success);      // True
```
  - Notice that we must escape the `period(.)` in the file extension using a `backslash`.
    -  To match the `literal period character`, it needs to be escaped with a `backslash \` to be treated as a literal character.
  - The following allows anything between cv and .docx and is equivalent to dir cv*.docx:
  ```c#
  Console.Write (Regex.Match ("cvjoint.docx", @"cv.*\.docx").Success); // True
  ```

# `+` matches one or more occurrences of the previous character or group.
  - Example: `ab+c` matches "abc", "abbc", "abbbc", etc., but not "ac".
  ```c#
  Console.Write (Regex.Matches ("slow! yeah slooow!", "slo+w").Count); // 2
  ```

# `?` matches zero or one occurrence of the previous character or group.
  - Example: `colou?r` matches "color" and "colour".
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("colorr", "colou?r"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("ccolorr", "colou?r"));  // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("color", "colou?r"));    // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("colour", "colou?r"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("collour", "colou?r"));   // False
```

# `[]` specifies a set of characters to match.
  - Example: [aeiou] matches any vowel. e.g "hahaha", "hoeir", but not "kkk"
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("hahaha", "[aeiou]"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("hoeir", "[aeiou]"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("kkkk", "[aeiou]"));   // False
```

# `()` creates a group of characters to match and captures the match.
  - Example: (\d{3})-\d{4} matches "123-4567" and captures "123".

# `|` is used to specify multiple patterns that should be matched.
  - For example, the pattern `a|b` would match either "a" or "b" or "ab".

# `\` escapes special characters or specifies character classes such as \d for digits or \s for whitespace.

# `{}` specifies the number of occurrences of the previous character or group, such as {3} for exactly three occurrences or {2,5} for between two and five occurrences.

# `i` case insensitive

# `[^]` ~ anchor: Matches any one character not inside the square brackets.
  - Example: [^aeiou] matches any consonant.
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.Match ("Not now", "^[Nn]o"));   // No
Console.WriteLine (Regex.Match ("f = 0.2F", "[Ff]$"));   // F
```
The positive lookahead ensures that \r doesn’t become part of the result. The
following matches lines that end in ".txt":
```c#
string fileNames = "a.txt" + "\r\n" + "b.docx" + "\r\n" + "c.txt"; string r = @".+\.txt(?=\r?$)";
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches (fileNames, r, RegexOptions.Multiline))
      Console.Write (m + " ");
// OUTPUT: a.txt c.txt
```
The following matches all empty lines in string s:
```c#
MatchCollection emptyLines = Regex.Matches (s, "^(?=\r?$)",
                                                RegexOptions.Multiline);
```
The following matches all lines that are either empty or contain only whitespace:
```c#
MatchCollection blankLines = Regex.Matches (s, "^[ \t]*(?=\r?$)", RegexOptions.Multiline);
```

# `\d` : Matches any digit character.
  - Example: \d{3}-\d{4} matches "123-4567".

# `\w` - Word Boundaries
 Matches any word character (alphanumeric or underscore).
  - Example: \w+ matches any sequence of word characters.
# `\b` is often used to match whole words
```c#
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches ("Wedding in Sarajevo", @"\b\w+\b"))
      Console.WriteLine (m);
//OUTPUT
Wedding
in
Sarajevo
```
The following statements highlight the effect of a word boundary:
```c#
int one = Regex.Matches ("Wedding in Sarajevo", @"\bin\b").Count; // 1 
int two = Regex.Matches ("Wedding in Sarajevo", @"in").Count; // 2
```
The next query uses positive lookahead to return words followed by “(sic)”: 
```c#
string text = "Don't loose (sic) your cool";
Console.Write (Regex.Match (text, @"\b\w+\b\s(?=\(sic\))")); // loose
```

# `\s` : Matches any whitespace character.
Example: `hello\s+world` matches "hello world" (with multiple spaces between).

# `IgnorePatternWhitespace or (?x)`: This allows you to insert whitespace to make a regular expression more readable—without the white‐ space being taken literally.
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("  ab", "(?i)A"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("  a", "(?i)A"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("a", "(?i)A"));   // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("A", "(?i)A"));   // True
```

# The `@ symbol` character before the string is a verbatim string literal, which means that escape sequences will be ignored. It allows you to `create a string without having to escape any special characters, including backslashes.`
  - Without @ symbol:
    -  `string path = "C:\\Users\\John\\Documents\\file.txt";`
    -  string message = "The quick brown fox\r\njumps over the lazy dog.";
  - With @ symbol:`string path = @"C:\Users\John\Documents\file.txt";`
    ```
    string message = @"The quick brown fox
    jumps over the lazy dog.";
    ```

# Groups

- `{n}` Exactly n matches
- `{n,}` At least n matches
- `{n,m}` Between n and m matches

Sometimes, it’s useful to separate a regular expression into a series of subexpres‐ sions, or groups. For instance, consider the following regular expression that repre‐ sents a US phone number such as 206-465-1918:
```c#
\d{3}-\d{3}-\d{4}
```
Suppose that we want to separate this into two groups: area code and local number. We can achieve this by using parentheses to capture each group:
```c#
    (\d{3})-(\d{3}-\d{4})
```
We then retrieve the groups programmatically:
```c#
Match m = Regex.Match ("206-465-1918", @"(\d{3})-(\d{3}-\d{4})"); Console.WriteLine (m.Groups[1]); // 206
Console.WriteLine (m.Groups[2]); // 465-1918
```
The zeroth group represents the entire match. In other words, it has the same value as the match’s Value:
```c#
    Console.WriteLine (m.Groups[0]);   // 206-465-1918
    Console.WriteLine (m);             // 206-465-1918
```

Groups are part of the regular expressions language itself. This means that you can refer to a group within a regular expression. The \n syntax lets you index the group by group number n within the expression. For example, the expression `(\w)ee\1` matches deed and peep. In the following example, we find all words in a string starting and ending in the same letter:
```c#
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches ("pop pope peep", @"\b(\w)\w+\1\b")) 
  Console.Write (m + " "); // pop peep
```

# \1
The pattern `\1` is a backreference in regular expressions, which refers to the content captured by the first capturing group in the pattern.

For example, the pattern `(\w)\1` would match any consecutive repeated letters or digits, such as `"ee" in "seek" or "11" in "611"`. The parentheses define a capturing group, and the backreference \1 refers to the content captured by that group, which in this case is the first letter or digit.

In general, backreferences are a powerful feature of regular expressions that allow you to refer to previously matched content and build more complex patterns.

# \k
 \k<name> is a backreference to a named capturing group. It matches the same text that was previously matched by the named group. The syntax \k is used to refer to a named group in the regular expression pattern.

```c#
Regex regex = new Regex(@"(?<word>\w+)\s+\k<word>");
string input = "hello hello world world";
MatchCollection matches = regex.Matches(input);
foreach (Match match in matches)
{
    Console.WriteLine(match.Value);
}
//output
hello hello
world world
```
In this example, the regular expression pattern (?<word>\w+)\s+\k<word> matches any word that is followed by the same word. The \w+ matches one or more word characters, and the \s+ matches one or more whitespace characters. The (?<word>\w+) creates a named capturing group called "word" that captures the matched word. The \k<word> backreference matches the same text as the named capturing group "word".


# \A Start of string (ignores multiline mode)

# \z End of string (ignores multiline mode)

# \Z End of line or string

# \G Where search started

# \B Not on a word boundary

# (?=expr)
Continue matching only if expression expr matches on right (positive lookahead)
# (?!expr)
Continue matching only if expression expr doesn’t match on right (negative lookahead)
# (?<=expr)
Continue matching only if expression expr matches on left (positive lookbehind)
# (?<!expr)
Continue matching only if expression expr doesn’t match on left (negative lookbehind)
# (?>expr)
Subexpressionexpris matched once and not backtracked

# Grouping constructs
(expr) Capture matched expressionexprinto indexed group
(?number) Capture matched substring into a specified group number
(?'name') Capture matched substring into groupname
(?'name1-name2') Undefinename2and store interval and current group intoname1; ifname2is undefined, matching backtracks
(?:expr) Noncapturing group

#  Back references
`\index` Reference a previously captured group byindex
`\k<name> `Reference a previously captured group byname

# Alternation

`|`: Logical or

`(?(expr)yes|no)`: Matchesyesif expression matches; otherwise, matchesno(nois optional) 
`(?(name)yes|no)`:  Matchesyesif named group has a match; otherwise, matchesno(nois optional)

# Miscellaneous constructs
(?#comment): Inline comment
#comment: Comment to end of line (works only inIgnorePatternWhitespacemode)
  
# Regular expression options

(?i): Case-insensitive match (“ignore” case)
(?m): Multiline mode; changes ^ and $ so that they match beginning and end of any line 
(?n): Captures only explicitly named or numbered groups
(?c): Compiles to Intermediate Language
(?s): Single-line mode; changes meaning of “.” so that it matches every character
(?x): Eliminates unescaped whitespace from the pattern
(?r): Searches from right to left; can’t be specified midstream

# Character categories
```
Quantifier Meaning
\p{L}       Letters
\p{Lu}      Uppercase letters
\p{Ll}      Lowercase letters
\p{N}       Numbers
\p{P}       Punctuation
\p{M}       Diacritic marks
\p{S}       Symbols
\p{Z}       Separators
\p{C}       Control characters
```

# Character escapes
```
Escape code         Meaning           Hexa equivalent
\a                  Bell                    \u0007
\b                  Backspace               \u0008
\t                  Tab                     \u0009
\r                  Carriage return         \u000A
\v                  Vertical tab            \u000B
\f                  Form feed               \u000C
\n                  Newline                 \u000D
\e                  Escape                  \u001B
\nnn                ASCII character nnn as octal (e.g., \n052)
\xnn                ASCII character nn as hex (e.g., \x3F)
\cl                 ASCII control character l (e.g., \cG for Ctrl-G)
\unnnn              Unicode character nnnn as hex (e.g., \u07DE)
\symbol             A nonescaped symbol
```

# Character Sets

`[abcdef]` Matches a single character in the list.
  - Inverse("not"): `[^abcdef]`
  
`[a-f]` Matches a single character in a range. 
  - Inverse("not"):`[^a-f]`

`\d` Matches anything in the Unicode digits category. In ECMAScript mode, [0-9].
  - Inverse("not"): `\D`

`\w` Matches a word character (by default, varies according to CultureInfo.CurrentCulture; for example, in English, same as [a-zA-Z_0-9]). 
  - Inverse("not"): `\W`

`\s` Matches a whitespace character; that is, anything for which `char.IsWhiteSpacereturns` true (including Unicode spaces). In ECMAScript mode, `[\n\r\t\f\v ]`. 
  - Inverse("not"): `\S`

`\p{category}` Matches a character in a specified category, such as {Lu} for uppercase letter or {P} for punctuation (we list the categories in the reference section later in the chapter):
  - Inverse("not"):`\P`

`.` (Default mode) Matches any character except\n.  (but allows \r)
  - Inverse("not"): `\n`

`.` (SingleLinemode) Matches any character.  
  - Inverse("not"): `\n`



# Substitutions
```
Expression Meaning
`$0` Substitutes the matched text
`$group-number` Substitutes an indexedgroup-numberwithin the matched text
`${group-name}` Substitutes a textgroup-namewithin the matched text
```