# Quantifier "?"

One of the most common regular expression operators is a quantifier. ? is a quantifier that matches the preceding item 0 or 1 time. In other words, ? means optional. An item is either a single character or a complex structure of characters in square brackets. For example, the r`egular expression "colou?r" matches color and colour`, but not colouur:
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.Match ("color", @"colou?r").Success); // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.Match ("colour", @"colou?r").Success); // True
Console.WriteLine (Regex.Match ("colouur", @"colou?r").Success); // False
```

Regex.Match searches within a larger string. The object that it returns has properties for the Index and Length of the match as well as the actual Value matched:
```c#
Match m = Regex.Match ("any colour you like", @"colou?r");

Console.WriteLine (m.Success);      // True
Console.WriteLine (m.Index);        // 4
Console.WriteLine (m.Length);       // 6
Console.WriteLine (m.Value);        // colour
Console.WriteLine (m.ToString());   // colour
```
You can think of `Regex.Match as a more powerful version of the string’s IndexOf method`. The difference is that `it searches for a pattern rather than a literal string`.

The `IsMatch` method is a shortcut for calling Match and then testing the Success property.
The regular expressions engine works from `left to right by default`, so only the `leftmost match is returned`. You can use the `NextMatch` method to return `more matches`:

```c#
Match m1 = Regex.Match ("One color? There are two colours in my head!", @"colou?rs?");
Match m2 = m1.NextMatch();
Console.WriteLine (m1);         // color
Console.WriteLine (m2);         // colours
```

The `Matches` method returns all matches in an array. We can rewrite the preceding example, as follows:
```c#
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches("One color? There are two colours in my head!", @"colou?rs?"))
      Console.WriteLine (m);
```

# Alternative "|"

Another common regular expressions operator is the alternator, expressed with a vertical bar, `|`. An alternator expresses alternatives. The following matches `“Jen”, “Jenny”, and “Jennifer”`:
```c#
Console.WriteLine (Regex.IsMatch ("Jenny", "Jen(ny|nifer)?")); // True
```
The brackets around an alternator separate the alternatives from the rest of the expression.


# To match exactly one of a set of characters, put the character set in square brackets
```c#
Console.Write (Regex.Matches ("That is that.", "[Tt]hat").Count); // 2
```

# To match any character except those in a set, put the set in square brackets with a ^symbol before the first character:
```c#
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("quiz qwerty", "q[^aeiou]").Index); // 5
```

# Specify a range of characters by using a hyphen
```c#
Console.Write (Regex.Match ("b1-c4", @"[a-h]\d-[a-h]\d").Success); // True
```