# Greedy Versus Lazy Quantifiers
By default, `quantifiers` are `greedy`, as opposed to `lazy`.
  -  A `greedy` quantifier `repeats as many times as it` can before advancing. 
  -  A `lazy` quantifier `repeats as few times as` it can before advancing.

In regular expressions, a quantifier is a symbol that specifies how many times a preceding element should be matched. For example, the quantifier "*" means that the preceding element can be matched zero or more times. By default, quantifiers are greedy, which means they try to match as many times as possible while still allowing the overall pattern to match.

For example, consider the regular expression "a.b", which matches any string that starts with an "a" and ends with a "b", with any characters in between. If we apply this expression to the string "aabab", the entire string will match, because the greedy quantifier "." matches as many characters as possible.

On the other hand, a lazy quantifier tries to match as few times as possible while still allowing the overall pattern to match. In regular expressions, a lazy quantifier is denoted by adding a "?" after the quantifier symbol. For example, the regular expression "a.?b" will match the same string "aabab", but only the substring "aab" will match, because the lazy quantifier ".?" matches as few characters as possible.

In summary, greedy quantifiers try to match as many times as possible, while lazy quantifiers try to match as few times as possible. The choice between greedy and lazy quantifiers depends on the specific needs of the regular expression.

# Lazy quantifier
A lazy quantifier repeats as few times as it can before advancing. You can make any quantifier lazy by suffixing it with the `?` symbol. To illustrate the difference, consider the following HTML fragment:
```c#
string html = "<i>By default</i> quantifiers are <i>greedy</i> creatures";
```
Suppose that we want to extract the two phrases in italics. If we execute the following
```c#
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches (html, @"<i>.*</i>"))
   Console.WriteLine (m);
```
the result is not two matches, but a single match:
```html
 <i>By default</i> quantifiers are <i>greedy</i>
```
The problem is that our * quantifier greedily repeats as many times as it can before matching </i>. So, it passes right by the first </i>, stopping only at the final </i> (the last point at which the rest of the expression can still match).
If we make the quantifier lazy, the * bails out at the first point at which the rest of the expression can match:
```c#
foreach (Match m in Regex.Matches (html, @"<i>.*?</i>")) Console.WriteLine (m);
```
Here’s the result:
```html
<i>By default</i> <i>greedy</i>
```
