#  
    case JsonTokenType.StartArray:
      Console.WriteLine();
      Console.WriteLine ($"Start of array");
      break;
    case JsonTokenType.EndArray:
      Console.WriteLine ($"End of array");
      break;
    case JsonTokenType.PropertyName:
      Console.Write ($"Property: {reader.GetString()}");
      break;
    case JsonTokenType.String:
      Console.WriteLine ($" Value: {reader.GetString()}");
      break;
    case JsonTokenType.Number:
      Console.WriteLine ($" Value: {reader.GetInt32()}");
      break;
    default:
      Console.WriteLine ($"No support for {reader.TokenType}");
      break;
  }
}
Here’s the output:

Start of object
Property: FirstName Value: Sara
Property: LastName Value: Wells
Property: Age Value: 35
Property: Friends
Start of array
 Value: Dylan
 Value: Ian
End of array
End of object
Because Utf8JsonReader works directly with UTF-8, it steps through the tokens without first having to convert the input into UTF-16 (the format of .NET strings). Conversion to UTF-16 takes place only when you call a method such as GetString().

Interestingly, Utf8JsonReader’s constructor does not accept a byte array, but rather a ReadOnlySpan<byte> (for this reason, Utf8JsonReader is defined as a ref struct). You can pass in a byte array because there’s an implicit conversion from T[] to ReadOnlySpan<T>. In Chapter 23, we describe how spans work and how you can use them to improve performance by minimizing memory allocations.

# JsonReaderOptions
By default, Utf8JsonReader requires that the JSON conform strictly to the JSON RFC 8259 standard. You can instruct the reader to be more tolerant by passing an instance of JsonReaderOptions to the Utf8JsonReader constructor. The options allow the following:

`C-Style comments`
By default, comments in JSON cause a JsonException to be thrown. Setting the CommentHandling property to JsonCommentHandling.Skip causes comments to be ignored, whereas JsonCommentHandling.Allow causes the reader to recognize them and emit JsonTokenType.Comment tokens when they are encountered. Comments cannot appear in the middle of other tokens.
`Trailing commas`
Per the standard, the last property of an object and the last element of an array must not have a trailing comma. Setting the AllowTrailingCommas property to e relaxes this restriction.
`Control over the maximum nesting depth`
By default, objects and arrays can nest to `64 levels`. Setting the MaxDepth to a different number overrides this setting.