# .NET Overview
Almost all of the capabilities of the .NET 6 runtime are exposed via a vast set of managed types. These types are organized into hierarchical namespaces and packaged into a set of assemblies.

Some of the .NET types are used directly by the CLR and are essential for the managed hosting environment. These types reside in an assembly called `System.Private.CoreLib.dll `and include C#’s built-in types as well as the basic collection classes, and types for stream processing, serialization, reflection, threading, and native interoperability.

`Note: System.Private.CoreLib.dll replaces .NET Framework’s mscorlib.dll. Many places in the official documentation still refer to mscorlib.`

At a level above this are additional types that “flesh out” the CLR-level functionality, providing features such as XML, JSON, networking, and Language-Integrated Query. These constitute the `Base Class Library` (BCL). Sitting above this are application layers, which provide APIs for developing particular kinds of applications such as web or rich client.

# Base class library
In .NET 6, the Base Class Library has numerous new features. In particular:

  - New DateOnly/TimeOnly structs cleanly capture a date or time for scenarios such as recording a birthday or alarm time (see “DateOnly and TimeOnly”).
  - A new BitOperations static class provides access to low-level base-2 numeric operations (see “BitOperations”).
  - The following new LINQ methods have been added: Chunk, DistinctBy, UnionBy, IntersectBy, ExceptBy, MinBy, and MaxBy (see Chapter 9). Take also now accepts a Range variable.
  - The new JsonNode API provides a fluent writable DOM whose types don’t require disposal (see “JsonNode”. Utf8JsonWriter also now has a WriteRawValue method
  - The new RandomAccess class provides performant thread-safe file I/O operations.
  - The new NullabilityInfoContext class in System.Reflection queries nullability annotations (see “NullabilityContextInfo”).
  - The RandomNumberGenerator class in System.Security.Cryptography now has a static GetBytes(int) method that returns an array of random bytes in one operation. There are also new methods to simplify encryption and decryption (see “Encrypting in Memory”).
  - A new ForEachAsync method on the Parallel class limits asynchronous concurrency (see “Parallel.ForEachAsync”). Task also now has a WaitAsync method, which applies a timeout to any asynchronous operation, and there’s a new timer designed to work with await (see “PeriodicTimer”).
  - The new NativeMemory class provides a lightweight wrapper around low-level memory allocation operations such as malloc.

# .NET Standard
`NET Standard is a set of APIs that define the set of common functionality that should be available across all .NET implementations. It defines a uniform set of base class libraries, so that libraries and applications can be written against this common set of APIs, and run on any .NET implementation that supports .NET Standard.`
`
`The purpose of .NET Standard is to provide a stable set of common APIs for .NET developers, allowing them to target multiple .NET platforms without worrying about platform-specific APIs. It is essentially an abstraction layer that helps to simplify the development of cross-platform .NET applications.`

The wealth of public libraries that are available on NuGet wouldn’t be as valuable if they supported only .NET 6. When writing a library, you’ll often want to support a variety of platforms and runtime versions. To achieve that goal without creating a separate build for each runtime, you must target the lowest common denominator. This is relatively easy if you wish to support only .NET 6’s direct predecessors: for example, if you target .NET Core 3.0, your library will run on .NET Core 3.0, .NET Core 3.1, and .NET 5+.

The situation becomes messier if you also want to support .NET Framework or Xamarin. This is because each of these runtimes has a CLR and BCL with overlapping features—no one runtime is a pure subset of the others.

.NET Standard solves this problem by defining artificial subsets that work across an entire range of legacy runtimes. By targeting .NET Standard, you can easily write libraries with extensive reach.

`Note`: .NET Standard is not a runtime; it’s merely a specification describing a minimum baseline of functionality (types and members) that guarantees compatibility with a certain set of runtimes. The concept is similar to C# interfaces: .NET Standard is like an interface that concrete types (runtimes) can implement.

# .NET Standard 2.0
The most useful version is .NET Standard 2.0. A library that targets .NET Standard 2.0 instead of a specific runtime will run without modification on most modern and legacy runtimes that are still in use today, including:

.NET Core 2.0+ (including .NET 5 and .NET 6)
UWP 10.0.16299+
Mono 5.4+ (the CLR/BCL used by older versions of Xamarin)
.NET Framework 4.6.1+

To target .NET Standard 2.0, add the following to your .csproj file:

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
  <PropertyGroup>
Most of the APIs described in this book are supported by .NET Standard 2.0.

# .NET Standard 2.1
NET Standard 2.1 is a superset of .NET Standard 2.0 that supports (only) the following platforms:

.NET Core 3+
Mono 6.4+

`.NET Standard 2.1 is not supported by any version of .NET Framework (and not even by UWP), making it much less useful than .NET Standard 2.0.`

The following APIs, in particular, are available in .NET Standard 2.1 (but not .NET Standard 2.0):

Span<T> (Chapter 23)
Reflection.Emit (Chapter 18)
ValueTask<T> (Chapter 14)

# Older .NET Standards
There are also older .NET Standards, most notably 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.6. A higher-numbered standard is always a strict superset of a lower-numbered standard. For instance, if you write a library that targets .NET Standard 1.6, you will support not only recent versions of the major runtimes but also .NET Core 1.0. And if you target .NET Standard 1.3, you support everything we’ve already mentioned plus .NET Framework 4.6.0. The table that follows elaborates:

If you target...	You also support...
Standard 1.6	.NET Core 1.0
Standard 1.3	Above plus .NET 4.6.0
Standard 1.2	Above plus .NET 4.5.1, Windows Phone 8.1, WinRT for Windows 8.1
Standard 1.1	Above plus .NET 4.5.0, Windows Phone 8.0, WinRT for Windows 8.0

# .NET Framework and .NET 6 Compatibility
Because .NET Framework has existed for so long, it’s not uncommon to encounter libraries that are available only for .NET Framework (with no .NET Standard, .NET Core, or .NET 6 equivalent). To help mitigate this situation, .NET 5+ and .NET Core projects are permitted to reference .NET Framework assemblies, with the following provisos:

An exception is thrown should the .NET Framework assembly call an API that’s unsupported.

Nontrivial dependencies might (and often do) fail to resolve.

In practice, it’s most likely to work in simple cases, such as an assembly that wraps an unmanaged DLL.

# Runtime and C# Language Versions
By default, your project’s runtime version determines which C# language version is used:

For .NET 6, it’s C# 10.

For .NET 5, it’s C# 9.

For .NET Core 3.x, Xamarin, and .NET Standard 2.1, it’s C# 8.

For .NET Core 2.x, .NET Framework, and .NET Standard 2.0 and below, it’s C# 7.3.

This is because later versions of C# rely on types that are available only in later runtimes.

You can override the language version in your project file with the <LangVersion> element. Using an older runtime (such as .NET 5) with a later language version (such as C# 10) means that the language features that rely on newer .NET types will not work (although in some cases, you can define those types yourself).