# Enums
In Chapter 3, we described C#’s enum type and showed how to combine members, test equality, use logical operators, and perform conversions. .NET extends C#’s support for enums through the System.Enum type. This type has two roles:

Providing type unification for all enum types

Defining static utility methods

Type unification means that you can implicitly cast any enum member to a System.Enum instance:

Display (Nut.Macadamia);     // Nut.Macadamia
Display (Size.Large);        // Size.Large

void Display (Enum value)
{
  Console.WriteLine (value.GetType().Name + "." + value.ToString());
}

enum Nut  { Walnut, Hazelnut, Macadamia }
enum Size { Small, Medium, Large }
The static utility methods on System.Enum are primarily related to performing conversions and obtaining lists of members.

# Enum Conversions
There are three ways to represent an enum value:

  - As an enum member
  - As its underlying integral value
  - As a string

In this section, we describe how to convert between each.

# Enum to integral conversions
Recall that an explicit cast converts between an enum member and its integral value. An explicit cast is the correct approach if you know the enum type at compile time:

[Flags] 
public enum BorderSides { Left=1, Right=2, Top=4, Bottom=8 }
...
int i = (int) BorderSides.Top;            // i == 4
BorderSides side = (BorderSides) i;       // side == BorderSides.Top
You can cast a System.Enum instance to its integral type in the same way. The trick is to first cast to an object and then the integral type:

static int GetIntegralValue (Enum anyEnum)
{
  return (int) (object) anyEnum;
}
This relies on you knowing the integral type: the method we just wrote would crash if passed an enum whose integral type was long. To write a method that works with an enum of any integral type, you can take one of three approaches. The first is to call Convert.ToDecimal:

static decimal GetAnyIntegralValue (Enum anyEnum)
{
  return Convert.ToDecimal (anyEnum);
}
This works because every integral type (including ulong) can be converted to decimal without loss of information. The second approach is to call Enum.GetUnderlyingType in order to obtain the enum’s integral type, and then call Convert.ChangeType:

static object GetBoxedIntegralValue (Enum anyEnum)
{
  Type integralType = Enum.GetUnderlyingType (anyEnum.GetType());
  return Convert.ChangeType (anyEnum, integralType);
}
This preserves the original integral type, as the following example shows:

object result = GetBoxedIntegralValue (BorderSides.Top);
Console.WriteLine (result);                               // 4
Console.WriteLine (result.GetType());                     // System.Int32

The third approach is to call Format or ToString specifying the "d" or "D" format string. This gives you the enum’s integral value as a string, and it is useful when writing custom serialization formatters:

static string GetIntegralValueAsString (Enum anyEnum)
{
  return anyEnum.ToString ("D");      // returns something like "4"
}

# Integral to enum conversions
Enum.ToObject converts an integral value to an enum instance of the given type:

object bs = Enum.ToObject (typeof (BorderSides), 3);
Console.WriteLine (bs);                              // Left, Right
This is the dynamic equivalent of the following:

BorderSides bs = (BorderSides) 3;
ToObject is overloaded to accept all integral types as well as object. (The latter works with any boxed integral type.)

# tring conversions
To convert an enum to a string, you can either call the static Enum.Format method or call ToString on the instance. Each method accepts a format string, which can be "G" for default formatting behavior, "D" to emit the underlying integral value as a string, "X" for the same in hexadecimal, or "F" to format combined members of an enum without the Flags attribute. We listed examples of these in “Standard Format Strings and Parsing Flags”.

Enum.Parse converts a string to an enum. It accepts the enum type and a string that can include multiple members:

BorderSides leftRight = (BorderSides) Enum.Parse (typeof (BorderSides),
                                                  "Left, Right");
An optional third argument lets you perform case-insensitive parsing. An Argument​Exception is thrown if the member is not found.

# Enumerating Enum Values
Enum.GetValues returns an array comprising all members of a particular enum type:

foreach (Enum value in Enum.GetValues (typeof (BorderSides)))
  Console.WriteLine (value);
Composite members such as LeftRight = Left | Right are included, too.

Enum.GetNames performs the same function but returns an array of strings.

`NOTE`
Internally, the CLR implements GetValues and GetNames by reflecting over the fields in the enum’s type. The results are cached for efficiency.

# How Enums Work
The semantics of enums are enforced largely by the compiler. In the CLR, there’s no runtime difference between an enum instance (when unboxed) and its underlying integral value. Further, an enum definition in the CLR is merely a subtype of System.Enum with static integral-type fields for each member. This makes the ordinary use of an enum highly efficient, with a runtime cost matching that of integral constants.

The downside of this strategy is that enums can provide static but not strong type safety. 

[Flags] public enum BorderSides { Left=1, Right=2, Top=4, Bottom=8 }
...
BorderSides b = BorderSides.Left;
b += 1234;                          // No error!
When the compiler is unable to perform validation (as in this example), there’s no backup from the runtime to throw an exception.

What we said about there being no runtime difference between an enum instance and its integral value might seem at odds with the following:

[Flags] public enum BorderSides { Left=1, Right=2, Top=4, Bottom=8 }
...
Console.WriteLine (BorderSides.Right.ToString());        // Right
Console.WriteLine (BorderSides.Right.GetType().Name);    // BorderSides
Given the nature of an enum instance at runtime, you’d expect this to print 2 and Int32! The reason for its behavior is down to some more compile-time trickery. C# explicitly boxes an enum instance before calling its virtual methods—such as ToString or GetType. And when an enum instance is boxed, it gains a runtime wrapping that references its enum type.