# Equality Comparison
Until now, we’ve assumed that the == and != operators are all there is to equality comparison. The issue of equality, however, is more complex and subtler, sometimes requiring the use of additional methods and interfaces. This section explores the standard C# and .NET protocols for equality, focusing particularly on two questions:

When are == and != adequate—and inadequate—for equality comparison, and what are the alternatives?

How and when should you customize a type’s equality logic?
# Value Versus Referential Equality
There are two kinds of equality:

  - `Value equality:` Two values are equivalent in some sense.
  - `Referential equality`: Two references refer to exactly the same object.

Unless overridden:
  - Value types use value equality.
  - Reference types use referential equality. (This is overridden with anonymous types and records.)

Value types, in fact, can use only value equality (unless boxed). A simple demonstration of value equality is to compare two numbers:
```c#
int x = 5, y = 5;
Console.WriteLine (x == y);   // True (by virtue of value equality)
```
A more elaborate demonstration is to compare two DateTimeOffset structs. The following prints True because the two DateTimeOffsets refer to the same point in time and so are considered equivalent:
```c#
var dt1 = new DateTimeOffset (2010, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, TimeSpan.FromHours(8));
var dt2 = new DateTimeOffset (2010, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, TimeSpan.FromHours(9));
Console.WriteLine (dt1 == dt2);   // True
```
`NOTE`
DateTimeOffset is a struct whose equality semantics have been tweaked. By default, structs exhibit a special kind of value equality called structural equality in which two values are considered equal if all of their members are equal. (You can see this by creating a struct and calling its Equals method; more on this later.)

# Reference types exhibit referential equality by default. In the following example, f1 and f2 are not equal, despite their objects having identical content:

class Foo { public int X; }
...
Foo f1 = new Foo { X = 5 };
Foo f2 = new Foo { X = 5 };
Console.WriteLine (f1 == f2);   // False
In contrast, f3 and f1 are equal because they reference the same object:

Foo f3 = f1;
Console.WriteLine (f1 == f3);   // True
Later in this section, we explain how you can customize reference types to exhibit value equality. An example of this is the Uri class in the System namespace:

Uri uri1 = new Uri ("http://www.linqpad.net");
Uri uri2 = new Uri ("http://www.linqpad.net");
Console.WriteLine (uri1 == uri2);              // True

The string class exhibits similar behavior:

var s1 = "http://www.linqpad.net";
var s2 = "http://" + "www.linqpad.net";
Console.WriteLine (s1 == s2);       // True

# Standard Equality Protocols
There are three standard protocols that types can implement for equality comparison:

  - The == and != operators
  - The virtual Equals method in object
  - The IEquatable<T> interface

# == and !=
We’ve already seen in many examples how the standard == and != operators perform equality/inequality comparisons. The subtleties with == and != arise because they are operators; thus, they are statically resolved (in fact, they are implemented as static functions). So, `when you use == or !=, C# makes a compile-time decision` as to which type will perform the comparison, and no virtual behavior comes into play. This is normally desirable. In the following example, the compiler hardwires == to the int type because x and y are both int:

int x = 5;
int y = 5;
Console.WriteLine (x == y);      // True
But in the next example, the compiler wires the == operator to the object type:

object x = 5;
object y = 5;
Console.WriteLine (x == y);      // False
Because object is a class (and so a reference type), object’s == operator uses referential equality to compare x and y. The result is false because x and y each refer to different boxed objects on the heap.

# The virtual Object.Equals method
To correctly equate x and y in the preceding example, we can use the virtual Equals method. Equals is defined in System.Object and so is available to all types:

```c#
object x = 5;
object y = 5;
Console.WriteLine (x.Equals (y));      // True
Class1 a = new Class1();
Class1 b = new Class1();
Console.WriteLine (a.Equals (b)); //  false 
```
`Equals is resolved at runtime—according` to the object’s actual type. In this case,` it calls Int32’s Equals method, which applies value equality to the operands, returning true`. With `reference types, Equals performs referential equality comparison by default`; with `structs, Equals performs structural comparison by calling Equals on each of its fields.`

# WHY THE COMPLEXITY?
You might wonder why the designers of C# didn’t avoid the problem by `making == virtual and thus functionally identical to Equals`. There are three reasons for this:

  - If the first operand is null, `Equals fails with a NullReferenceException; a static operator does not`.
  - Because `the == operator is statically resolved`, it executes extremely quickly. This means that you can write computationally intensive code without penalty—and without needing to learn another language such as C++.
  - Sometimes it can be useful to have == and Equals apply different definitions of equality. We describe this scenario later in this section.

Essentially, the complexity of the design reflects the complexity of the situation: the concept of equality covers a multitude of scenarios.

Hence, Equals is suitable for equating two objects in a type-agnostic fashion. The following method equates two objects of any type:
```c#
public static bool AreEqual (object obj1, object obj2) 
  => obj1.Equals (obj2);
```
There is one case, however, in which this fails. If the first argument is null, you get a NullReferenceException. Here’s the fix:
```c#
public static bool AreEqual (object obj1, object obj2)
{
  if (obj1 == null) return obj2 == null;
  return obj1.Equals (obj2);
}
```
Or, more succinctly:
```c#
public static bool AreEqual (object obj1, object obj2)
  => obj1 == null ? obj2 == null : obj1.Equals (obj2);
  ```

# The static object.Equals method
The object class provides a static helper method that does the work of AreEqual in the preceding example. Its name is Equals—just like the virtual method—but there’s no conflict because it accepts two arguments:

public static bool Equals (object objA, object objB)
This provides a null-safe equality comparison algorithm for when the types are unknown at compile time:

object x = 3, y = 3;
Console.WriteLine (object.Equals (x, y));   // True
x = null;
Console.WriteLine (object.Equals (x, y));   // False
y = null;
Console.WriteLine (object.Equals (x, y));   // True
A useful application is when writing generic types. The following code will not compile if object.Equals is replaced with the == or != operator:

class Test <T>
{
  T _value;
  public void SetValue (T newValue)
  {
    if (!object.Equals (newValue, _value))
    {
      _value = newValue;
      OnValueChanged();
    }
  }
  protected virtual void OnValueChanged() { ... }
}
Operators are prohibited here because the compiler cannot bind to the static method of an unknown type.

NOTE
A more elaborate way to implement this comparison is with the EqualityComparer<T> class. This has the advantage of preventing boxing:

if (!EqualityComparer<T>.Default.Equals (newValue, _value))

# The static object.ReferenceEquals method
Occasionally, you need to force referential equality comparison. The static object.ReferenceEquals method does just that:

Widget w1 = new Widget();
Widget w2 = new Widget();
Console.WriteLine (object.ReferenceEquals (w1, w2));     // False

class Widget { ... }
You might want to do this because it’s possible for Widget to override the virtual Equals method such that w1.Equals(w2) would return true. Further, it’s possible for Widget to overload the == operator so that w1==w2 would also return true. In such cases, calling object.ReferenceEquals guarantees normal referential equality semantics.
`Note`: 
Another way to force referential equality comparison is to cast the values to object and then apply the == operator.

# The IEquatable<T> interface
A consequence of calling object.Equals is that it forces boxing on value types. This is undesirable in highly performance-sensitive scenarios because boxing is relatively expensive compared to the actual comparison. A solution was introduced in C# 2.0, with the IEquatable<T> interface:

public interface IEquatable<T>
{
  bool Equals (T other);
}
The idea is that IEquatable<T>, when implemented, gives the same result as calling object’s virtual Equals method—but more quickly. Most basic .NET types implement IEquatable<T>. You can use IEquatable<T> as a constraint in a generic type:

class Test<T> where T : IEquatable<T>
{
  public bool IsEqual (T a, T b)
  {
    return a.Equals (b);     // No boxing with generic T
  }
}
If we remove the generic constraint, the class would still compile, but a.Equals(b) would instead bind to the slower object.Equals (slower assuming T was a value type).

# When Equals and == are not equal
We said earlier that it’s sometimes useful for == and Equals to apply different definitions of equality. For example:

double x = double.NaN;
Console.WriteLine (x == x);            // False
Console.WriteLine (x.Equals (x));      // True
The double type’s == operator enforces that one NaN can never equal anything else—even another NaN. This is most natural from a mathematical perspective, and it reflects the underlying CPU behavior. The Equals method, however, is obliged to apply reflexive equality; in other words:

x.Equals (x) must always return true.

Collections and dictionaries rely on Equals behaving this way; otherwise, they could not find an item they previously stored.

Having Equals and == apply different definitions of equality is actually quite rare with value types. A more common scenario is with reference types; this happens when the author customizes Equals so that it performs value equality while leaving == to perform (default) referential equality. The StringBuilder class does exactly that:
```c#
var sb1 = new StringBuilder ("foo");
var sb2 = new StringBuilder ("foo");
Console.WriteLine (sb1 == sb2);          // False (referential equality)
Console.WriteLine (sb1.Equals (sb2));    // True  (value equality)
```

# Equality and Custom Types
Recall default equality comparison behavior:
  - Value types use value equality.
  - Reference types use referential equality unless overridden (as is the case with anonymous types and records).

Further:
A struct’s Equals method applies structural value equality by default (i.e., it compares each field in the struct).

Sometimes, it makes sense to override this behavior when writing a type. There are two cases for doing so:
  - To change the meaning of equality
  - To speed up equality comparisons for structs

# Changing the meaning of equality
Changing the meaning of equality makes sense when the default behavior of == and Equals is unnatural for your type and is not what a consumer would expect. An example is DateTimeOffset, a struct with two private fields: a UTC DateTime and a numeric integer offset. If you were writing this type, you’d probably want to ensure that equality comparisons considered only the UTC DateTime field and not the offset field. Another example is numeric types that support NaN values such as float and double. If you were implementing such types yourself, you’d want to ensure that NaN-comparison logic was supported in equality comparisons.

With classes, it’s sometimes more natural to offer value equality as the default instead of referential equality. This is often `the case with small classes that hold a simple piece of data, such as System.Uri (or System.String).`

With `records, the compiler automatically implements structural equality (by comparing each field)`. Sometimes, however, this will include fields that you don’t want to compare, or objects that require special comparison logic, such as collections. The process of overriding equality with records is slightly different because records follow a special pattern that’s designed to play well with its rules for inheritance.

# Speeding up equality comparisons with structs
`The default structural equality comparison algorithm for structs is relatively slow`. Taking over this process by overriding Equals can improve performance by a factor of five. Overloading the == operator and implementing IEquatable<T> allows unboxed equality comparisons, and this can speed things up by a fa  ctor of five again.

`Note`: Overriding equality semantics for reference types doesn’t benefit performance. The default algorithm for referential equality comparison is already very fast because it simply compares two 32- or 64-bit references

There’s another, rather peculiar case for customizing equality, and that’s to improve a struct’s hashing algorithm for better performance in a hashtable. This comes as a result of the fact that equality comparison and hashing are joined at the hip

# How to override equality semantics
To override equality with classes or structs, here are the steps:

  - Override GetHashCode() and Equals().
  - (Optionally) overload != and ==.
  - (Optionally) implement IEquatable<T>.

The process is different (and simpler) with records because the compiler already overrides the equality methods and operators in line with its own special pattern. If you want to intervene, you must conform to this pattern, which means writing an Equals method with a signature like this:

record Test (int X, int Y)
{
  public virtual bool Equals (Test t) => t != null && t.X == X && t.Y == Y;
}
Notice that Equals is virtual (not override) and accepts the actual record type (Test in this case, and not object). The compiler will recognize that your method has the “correct” signature and will patch it in.
`You must also override GetHashCode(), just as you would with classes or structs. You don’t need to (and shouldn’t) overload != and ==, or implement IEquatable<T>, because this is already done for you.`

# Overriding GetHashCode
It might seem odd that System.Object—with its small footprint of members—defines a method with a specialized and narrow purpose. GetHashCode is a virtual method in Object that fits this description; it exists primarily for the benefit of just the following two types:

System.Collections.Hashtable
System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary<TKey,TValue>
These are hashtables—collections for which each element has a key used for storage and retrieval. A hashtable applies a very specific strategy for efficiently allocating elements based on their key. This requires that each key have an Int32 number, or hash code. The hash code need not be unique for each key but should be as varied as possible for good hashtable performance. Hashtables are considered important enough that GetHashCode is defined in System.Object—so that every type can emit a hash code.

Both reference and value types have default implementations of GetHashCode, meaning that you don’t need to override this method—unless you override Equals. (And if you override GetHashCode, you will almost certainly want to also override Equals.)

Here are the other rules for overriding object.GetHashCode:

  - It must return the same value on two objects for which Equals returns true (hence, GetHashCode and Equals are overridden together).
   - It must not throw exceptions.
   - It must return the same value if called repeatedly on the same object (unless the object has changed).

For maximum performance in hashtables, you should write GetHashCode so as to minimize the likelihood of two different values returning the same hashcode. This gives rise to the third reason for overriding Equals and GetHashCode on structs, which is to provide a more efficient hashing algorithm than the default. The default implementation for structs is at the discretion of the runtime and can be based on every field in the struct.

In contrast, the default GetHashCode implementation for classes is based on an internal object token, which is unique for each instance in the CLR’s current implementation.

# Overriding Equals
The axioms for object.Equals are as follows:

  - An object cannot equal null (unless it’s a nullable type).

  - Equality is reflexive (an object equals itself).

  - Equality is commutative (if a.Equals(b), then b.Equals(a)).

  - Equality is transitive (if a.Equals(b) and b.Equals(c), then a.Equals(c)).

  - Equality operations are repeatable and reliable (they don’t throw exceptions).

# Overloading == and !=
In addition to overriding Equals, you can optionally overload the equality and inequality operators. This is nearly always done with structs because the consequence of not doing so is that the == and != operators will simply not work on your type.

With classes, there are two ways to proceed:

Leave == and != alone—so that they apply referential equality.

Overload == and != in line with Equals.

The first approach is most common with custom types—especially mutable types. It ensures that your type follows the expectation that == and != should exhibit referential equality with reference types, and this prevents confusing consumers. We saw an example earlier:

var sb1 = new StringBuilder ("foo");
var sb2 = new StringBuilder ("foo");
Console.WriteLine (sb1 == sb2);          // False (referential equality)
Console.WriteLine (sb1.Equals (sb2));    // True  (value equality)
The second approach makes sense with types for which a consumer would never want referential equality. These are typically immutable—such as the string and System.Uri classes—and are sometimes good candidates for structs.

# Implementing IEquatable<T>
For completeness, it’s also good to implement IEquatable<T> when overriding Equals. Its results should always match those of the overridden object’s Equals method. Implementing IEquatable<T> comes at no programming cost if you structure your Equals method implementation as in the example that follows in a moment.

# An example: the Area struct
Imagine that we need a struct to represent an area whose width and height are interchangeable. In other words, 5 × 10 is equal to 10 × 5. (Such a type would be suitable in an algorithm that arranges rectangular shapes.)

Here’s the complete code:

public struct Area : IEquatable <Area>
{
  public readonly int Measure1;
  public readonly int Measure2;

  public Area (int m1, int m2)
  {
    Measure1 = Math.Min (m1, m2);
    Measure2 = Math.Max (m1, m2);
  }

  public override bool Equals (object other)
      => other is Area a && Equals (a);    // Calls method below

  public bool Equals (Area other)        // Implements IEquatable<Area>
    => Measure1 == other.Measure1 && Measure2 == other.Measure2;

  public override int GetHashCode()
    => HashCode.Combine (Measure1, Measure2);

  public static bool operator == (Area a1, Area a2) => a1.Equals (a2);

  public static bool operator != (Area a1, Area a2) => !a1.Equals (a2);
}

In implementing GetHashCode, we used .NET’s HashCode.Combine function to produce a composite hashcode. (Before that function existed, a popular approach was to multiply each value by some prime number and then add them together.)

Here’s a demonstration of the Area struct:

Area a1 = new Area (5, 10);
Area a2 = new Area (10, 5);
Console.WriteLine (a1.Equals (a2));    // True
Console.WriteLine (a1 == a2);          // True

# Pluggable equality comparers
If you want a type to take on different equality semantics just for a specific scenario, you can use a pluggable IEqualityComparer

