# Console
The static Console class handles standard input/output for console-based applications. In a command-line (console) application, the input comes from the keyboard via Read, ReadKey, and ReadLine, and the output goes to the text window via Write and WriteLine. You can control the window’s position and dimensions with the properties WindowLeft, WindowTop, WindowHeight, and WindowWidth. You can also change the BackgroundColor and ForegroundColor properties and manipulate the cursor with the CursorLeft, CursorTop, and CursorSize properties:

Console.WindowWidth = Console.LargestWindowWidth;
Console.ForegroundColor = ConsoleColor.Green;
Console.Write ("test... 50%");
Console.CursorLeft -= 3;
Console.Write ("90%");     // test... 90%
The Write and WriteLine methods are overloaded to accept a composite format string (see String.Format in “String and Text Handling”). However, neither method accepts a format provider, so you’re stuck with CultureInfo​.Cur⁠rentCulture. (The workaround, of course, is to explicitly call string.Format.)

The Console.Out property returns a TextWriter. Passing Console.Out to a method that expects a TextWriter is a useful way to get that method to write to the Console for diagnostic purposes.

You can also redirect the Console’s input and output streams via the SetIn and SetOut methods:

// First save existing output writer:
System.IO.TextWriter oldOut = Console.Out;

// Redirect the console's output to a file:
using (System.IO.TextWriter w = System.IO.File.CreateText
                                ("e:\\output.txt"))
{
  Console.SetOut (w);
  Console.WriteLine ("Hello world");
}

// Restore standard console output
Console.SetOut (oldOut);
# Environment
The static System.Environment class provides a range of useful properties:

Files and folders
CurrentDirectory, SystemDirectory, CommandLine
Computer and operating system
MachineName, ProcessorCount, OSVersion, NewLine
User logon
UserName, UserInteractive, UserDomainName
Diagnostics
TickCount, StackTrace, WorkingSet, Version
You can obtain additional folders by calling GetFolderPath; we describe this in “File and Directory Operations”.

You can access OS environment variables (what you see when you type set at the command prompt) with the following three methods: GetEnvironmentVariable, GetEnvironmentVariables, and SetEnvironmentVariable.

The ExitCode property lets you set the return code—for when your program is called from a command or batch file—and the FailFast method terminates a program immediately, without performing cleanup.

The Environment class available to Windows Store apps offers just a limited number of members (ProcessorCount, NewLine, and FailFast).

# Process
The Process class in System.Diagnostics allows you to launch a new process. (In Chapter 13, we describe how you can also use it to interact with other processes running on the computer.)

NOTE
For security reasons, the Process class is not available to Windows Store apps, and you cannot start arbitrary processes. Instead, you must use the Windows.System.Launcher class to “launch” a URI or file to which you have access. For example,

Launcher.LaunchUriAsync (new Uri ("http://albahari.com"));

var file = await KnownFolders.DocumentsLibrary
                             .GetFileAsync ("foo.txt");
Launcher.LaunchFileAsync (file);
opens the URI or file, using whatever program is associated with the URI scheme or file extension. Your program must be in the foreground for this to work.

The static Process.Start method has several overloads; the simplest accepts a simple filename with optional arguments:

Process.Start ("notepad.exe");
Process.Start ("notepad.exe", "e:\\file.txt");
The most flexible overload accepts a ProcessStartInfo instance. With this, you can capture and redirect the launched process’s input, output, and error output (if you leave UseShellExecute as false). The following captures the output of calling ipconfig:

ProcessStartInfo psi = new ProcessStartInfo
{
  FileName = "cmd.exe",
  Arguments = "/c ipconfig /all",
  RedirectStandardOutput = true,
  UseShellExecute = false
};
Process p = Process.Start (psi);
string result = p.StandardOutput.ReadToEnd();
Console.WriteLine (result);
If you don’t redirect output, Process.Start executes the program in parallel to the caller. If you want to wait for the new process to complete, you can call WaitForExit on the Process object, with an optional timeout.

# With UseShellExecute false (the default in .NET), you can capture the standard input, output, and error streams and then write/read these streams via the Standar⁠d​Input, StandardOutput, and StandardError properties.

A difficulty arises when you need to redirect both the standard output and standard error streams, in that you can’t usually know in which order to read data from each (because you don’t know in advance how the data will be interleaved). The solution is to read from both streams at once, which you can accomplish by reading from (at least) one of the streams asynchronously. Here’s how to do this:

Handle the OutputDataReceived and/or ErrorDataReceived events. These events fire when output/error data is received.

Call BeginOutputReadLine and/or BeginErrorReadLine. This enables the aforementioned events.

The following method runs an executable while capturing both the output and error streams:

(string output, string errors) Run (string exePath, string args = "")
{
  using var p = Process.Start (new ProcessStartInfo (exePath, args)
  {
    RedirectStandardOutput = true,
    RedirectStandardError = true,
    UseShellExecute = false,    
  });
  
  var errors = new StringBuilder ();

  // Read from the error stream asynchronously...
  p.ErrorDataReceived += (sender, errorArgs) =>
  {
    if (errorArgs.Data != null) errors.AppendLine (errorArgs.Data);
  };
  p.BeginErrorReadLine ();
  
  // ...while we read from the output stream synchronously:
  string output = p.StandardOutput.ReadToEnd();

  p.WaitForExit();
  return (output, errors.ToString());
}
UseShellExecute
NOTE
In .NET 5+ (and .NET Core), the default for UseShellExecute is false, whereas in .NET Framework, it was true. Because this is a breaking change, it’s worth checking all calls to Process.Start when porting code from .NET Framework.

The UseShellExecute flag changes how the CLR starts the process. With UseShell​Execute true, you can do the following:

Specify a path to a file or document rather than an executable (resulting in the operating system opening the file or document with its associated application)

Specify a URL (resulting in the operating system navigating to that URL in the default web browser)

(Windows only) Specify a Verb (such as “runas”, to run the process with administrative elevation)

The drawback is that you cannot redirect the input or output streams. Should you need to do so—while launching a file or document—a workaround is to set UseShellExecute to false and invoke the command-line process (cmd.exe) with the “/c” switch, as we did earlier when calling ipconfig.

Under Windows, UseShellExecute instructs the CLR to use the Windows ShellExecute function instead of the CreateProcess function. Under Linux, UseShellExecute instructs the CLR to call xdg-open, gnome-open, or kfmclient.

# AppContext
The static System.AppContext class exposes two useful properties:

BaseDirectory returns the folder in which the application started. This folder is important for assembly resolution (finding and loading dependencies) and locating configuration files (such as appsettings.json).

TargetFrameworkName tells you the name and version of the .NET runtime that the application targets (as specified in its .runtimeconfig.json file). This might be older than the runtime actually in use.

In addition, the AppContext class manages a global string-keyed dictionary of Boolean values, intended to offer library writers a standard mechanism for allowing consumers to switch new features on or off. This untyped approach makes sense with experimental features that you want to keep undocumented to the majority of users.

The consumer of a library requests that you enable a feature as follows:

AppContext.SetSwitch ("MyLibrary.SomeBreakingChange", true);
Code within that library can then check for that switch as follows:

bool isDefined, switchValue;
isDefined = AppContext.TryGetSwitch ("MyLibrary.SomeBreakingChange",
                                      out switchValue);
TryGetSwitch returns false if the switch is undefined; this lets you distinguish an undefined switch from one whose value is set to false, should this be necessary.

NOTE
Ironically, the design of TryGetSwitch illustrates how not to write APIs. The out parameter is unnecessary, and the method should instead return a nullable bool whose value is true, false, or null for undefined. This would then enable the following use:

bool switchValue = AppContext.GetSwitch ("...") ?? false;