
# InProblems with HttpClienttro
The HttpClient class implements the IDisposable interface. By seeing that, we can all be tempted to try using our HttpClient instance inside the using directive, thus disposing of it once it is out of the scope. But, this is not a good practice. If we dispose of the HttpClient, we are going to dispose of the underlying HttpClientHandler as well. Now, this means that for every new request we have to create a new HttpClient instance and thus the handler as well. Of course, that’s the problem. Reopening connections could lead to slow performance because these connections and HttpClientHandlers are pretty expensive while working with HttpClient.
Also, there is another problem. By creating too many connections, we can face socket exhaustion because we use too many sockets too fast, and we don’t have any available socket to create a new connection.
So, with all these in mind, we can conclude that we shouldn’t dispose of our HttpClient but share it throughout the requests. That’s what we’ve been doing in our previous articles with the static HttpClient instance. This also allows reusing of the underlying connections.
But, we have to pay attention, that using a static instance is not the ultimate solution. When we reuse our instance, we also reuse the connection until the socket is closed. Thus connections won’t get the update from DNS (for example switching between different environments). If our connection is not aware of switching from staging to the production environment, our requests would not go to the right environment as well.

To help us solve these problems, we can use HttpClientFactory to create HttpClient instances.

# How HttpClientFactory Helps Us Solve Mentioned Problems?
Not only that HttpClientFactory can create and manage new HttpClient instances but also, it works with underlying handlers. Basically, when creating new HttpClient instances, it doesn’t recreate a new message handler but it takes one from a pool. Then, it uses that message handler to send the requests to the API. The default lifetime of a handler is set to two minutes, and during that time, any request for a new HttpClient can reuse an existing message handler and the connection as well. This means we don’t have to create a new message handler for every request and also we don’t have to open a new connection, thus preventing the socket exhausting issue.

Furthermore, since the handler’s lifetime is set to two minutes, after that time, HttpClientFactory uses a new message handler. Well, with that, we solve the DNS issues. When we use a new message handler, we take all the DNS changes into account.

https://code-maze.com/using-httpclientfactory-in-asp-net-core-applications/

https://andrewlock.net/understanding-scopes-with-ihttpclientfactory-message-handlers/