# The CLR and BCL
# System Types
The most fundamental types live directly in the System namespace. These include C#’s built-in types; the Exception base class; the Enum, Array, and Delegate base classes; and Nullable, Type, DateTime, TimeSpan, and Guid. The System namespace also includes types for performing mathematical functions (Math), generating random numbers (Random), and converting between various types (Convert and BitConverter).

Chapter 6 describes these types as well as the interfaces that define standard protocols used across .NET for such tasks as formatting (IFormattable) and order comparison (IComparable).

The System namespace also defines the IDisposable interface and the GC class for interacting with the garbage collector,

# Text Processing
The System.Text namespace contains the StringBuilder class (the editable or mutable cousin of string) and the types for working with text encodings, such as UTF-8 (Encoding and its subtypes). We cover this in Chapter 6.

The System.Text.RegularExpressions namespace contains types that perform advanced pattern-based search-and-replace operations; we describe these in Chapter 25.

# Collections
.NET offers a variety of classes for managing collections of items. These include both list- and dictionary-based structures; they work in conjunction with a set of standard interfaces that unify their common characteristics. All collection types are defined in the following namespaces, covered in Chapter 7:

System.Collections                 // Nongeneric collections
System.Collections.Generic         // Generic collections
System.Collections.Specialized     // Strongly typed collections
System.Collections.ObjectModel     // Bases for your own collections
System.Collections.Concurrent      // Thread-safe collections (Chapter 22)
# Querying
Language-Integrated Query (LINQ) allows you to perform type-safe queries over local and remote collections (e.g., SQL Server tables) and is described in Chapters 8 through 10. A big advantage of LINQ is that it presents a consistent querying API across a variety of domains. The essential types reside in the following namespaces:

System.Linq                  // LINQ to Objects and PLINQ
System.Linq.Expressions      // For building expressions manually
System.Xml.Linq              // LINQ to XML
# XML and JSON
XML and JSON are widely supported in .NET. Chapter 10 focuses entirely on LINQ to XML—a lightweight XML Document Object Model (DOM) that can be constructed and queried through LINQ. Chapter 11 covers the performant low-level XML reader/writer classes, XML schemas and stylesheets, and types for working with JSON:

System.Xml                // XmlReader, XmlWriter
System.Xml.Linq           // The LINQ to XML DOM
System.Xml.Schema         // Support for XSD
System.Xml.Serialization  // Declarative XML serialization for .NET types
System.Xml.XPath          // XPath query language
System.Xml.Xsl            // Stylesheet support

System.Text.Json          // JSON reader/writer and DOM
In the online supplement at http://www.albahari.com/nutshell, we cover the JSON serializer.

# Diagnostics
In Chapter 13, we cover logging and assertion and describe how to interact with other processes, write to the Windows event log, and handle performance monitoring. The types for this are defined in and under System.Diagnostics.

# Concurrency and Asynchrony
Many modern applications need to deal with more than one thing happening at a time. Since C# 5.0, this has become easier through asynchronous functions and high-level constructs such as tasks and task combinators. Chapter 14 explains all of this in detail, after starting with the basics of multithreading. Types for working with threads and asynchronous operations are in the System.Threading and System.Threading.Tasks namespaces.

Streams and Input/Output
.NET provides a stream-based model for low-level input/output (I/O). Streams are typically used to read and write directly to files and network connections, and can be chained or wrapped in decorator streams to add compression or encryption functionality. Chapter 15 describes the stream architecture as well as the specific support for working with files and directories, compression, pipes, and memory-mapped files. The Stream and I/O types are defined in and under the System.IO namespace, and the Windows Runtime (WinRT) types for file I/O are in and under Windows.Storage.

# Networking
You can directly access most standard network protocols such as HTTP, TCP/IP, and SMTP via the types in System.Net. In Chapter 16, we demonstrate how to communicate using each of these protocols, starting with simple tasks such as downloading from a web page and finishing with using TCP/IP directly to retrieve POP3 email. Here are the namespaces we cover:

System.Net
System.Net.Http          // HttpClient
System.Net.Mail          // For sending mail via SMTP
System.Net.Sockets       // TCP, UDP, and IP
Assemblies, Reflection, and Attributes
The assemblies into which C# programs compile comprise executable instructions (stored as IL) and metadata, which describes the program’s types, members, and attributes. Through reflection, you can inspect this metadata at runtime and do such things as dynamically invoke methods. With Reflection.Emit, you can construct new code on the fly.

In Chapter 17, we describe the makeup of assemblies and how to dynamically load and isolate them. In Chapter 18, we cover reflection and attributes—describing how to inspect metadata, dynamically invoke functions, write custom attributes, emit new types, and parse raw IL. The types for using reflection and working with assemblies reside in the following namespaces:

System
System.Reflection
System.Reflection.Emit
# Dynamic Programming
In Chapter 19, we look at some of the patterns for dynamic programming and utilizing the Dynamic Language Runtime (DLR). We describe how to implement the Visitor pattern, write custom dynamic objects, and interoperate with IronPython. The types for dynamic programming are in System.Dynamic.

# Cryptography
.NET provides extensive support for popular hashing and encryption protocols. In Chapter 20, we cover hashing, symmetric and public-key encryption, and the Windows Data Protection API. The types for this are defined in:

System.Security
System.Security.Cryptography
# Advanced Threading
C#’s asynchronous functions make concurrent programming significantly easier because they lessen the need for lower-level techniques. However, there are still times when you need signaling constructs, thread-local storage, reader/writer locks, and so on. Chapter 21 explains this in depth. Threading types are in the System.Threading namespace.

# Parallel Programming
In Chapter 22, we cover in detail the libraries and types for leveraging multicore processors, including APIs for task parallelism, imperative data parallelism, and functional parallelism (PLINQ).

# Span<T> and Memory<T>
To help with micro-optimizing performance hotspots, the CLR provides a number of types to help you program in such a way as to reduce the load on the memory manager. Two of the key types are Span<T> and Memory<T>, which we describe in Chapter 23.

# Native and COM Interoperability
You can interoperate with both native and Component Object Model (COM) code. Native interoperability allows you to call functions in unmanaged DLLs, register callbacks, map data structures, and interoperate with native data types. COM interoperability allows you to call COM types (on Windows machines) and expose .NET types to COM. The types that support these functions are in System.Runtime.InteropServices, and we cover them in Chapter 24.

# Regular Expressions
In Chapter 25, we cover how you can use regular expressions to match character patterns in strings.

# Serialization
.NET provides several systems for saving and restoring objects to a binary or text representation. Such systems can be used for communication as well as for saving and restoring objects to a file. In the online supplement at http://www.albahari.com/nutshell, we cover all four serialization engines: the binary serializer, the (newly updated) JSON serializer, the XML serializer, and the data contract serializer.

# The Roslyn Compiler
The C# compiler itself is written in C#—the project is called “Roslyn,” and the libraries are available as NuGet packages. With these libraries, you can utilize the compiler’s functionality in many ways besides compiling source code to an assembly, such as writing code analysis and refactoring tools. We cover Roslyn in the online supplement, at http://www.albahari.com/nutshell.