# what is Daylight delta?
Daylight delta, also known as daylight saving delta, refers to the difference in time offset between standard time and daylight saving time. In regions where daylight saving time is observed, the clock is usually set ahead by one hour during the summer months, and then set back by one hour during the winter months to revert back to standard time. The daylight delta is the number of hours by which the time changes between standard time and daylight saving time. For example, in the United States, the daylight delta is usually 1 hour, meaning that during daylight saving time, clocks are set ahead by 1 hour compared to standard time.
# DateTime and Time Zones
DateTime is simplistic in its handling of time zones. Internally, it stores a DateTime using two pieces of information:
  - A 62-bit number, indicating the `number of ticks since 1/1/0001`
  - A 2-bit enum, indicating the `DateTimeKind (Unspecified, Local, or Utc)`

When you `compare two DateTime instances, only their ticks values are compared; their DateTimeKinds are ignored:`
```c#
DateTime dt1 = new DateTime (2000, 1, 1, 10, 20, 30, DateTimeKind.Local);
DateTime dt2 = new DateTime (2000, 1, 1, 10, 20, 30, DateTimeKind.Utc);
Console.WriteLine (dt1 == dt2);          // True
DateTime local = DateTime.Now;
DateTime utc = local.ToUniversalTime();
Console.WriteLine (local == utc);        // False
```
The instance methods ToUniversalTime/ToLocalTime convert to universal/local time. These apply the computer’s current time zone settings and return a new DateTime with a DateTimeKind of Utc or Local. No conversion happens if you call ToUniversalTime on a DateTime that’s already Utc, or ToLocalTime on a DateTime that’s already Local. You will get a conversion, however, if you call ToUniversalTime or ToLocalTime on a DateTime that’s Unspecified.

You can construct a DateTime that differs from another only in Kind with the static DateTime.SpecifyKind method:
```c#
DateTime d = new DateTime (2015, 12, 12);  // Unspecified
DateTime utc = DateTime.SpecifyKind (d, DateTimeKind.Utc);
Console.WriteLine (utc);            // 12/12/2015 12:00:00 AM
```

# DateTimeOffset and Time Zones
Internally, DateTimeOffset comprises a DateTime field whose value is always in UTC, and a 16-bit integer field for the UTC offset in minutes. Comparisons look only at the (UTC) DateTime; the Offset is used primarily for formatting.

The ToUniversalTime/ToLocalTime methods return a DateTimeOffset representing the same point in time but with a UTC or local offset. Unlike with DateTime, these methods don’t affect the underlying date/time value, only the offset:
```c#
DateTimeOffset local = DateTimeOffset.Now;
DateTimeOffset utc   = local.ToUniversalTime();

Console.WriteLine (local.Offset);   // -06:00:00 (in Central America)
Console.WriteLine (utc.Offset);     // 00:00:00

Console.WriteLine (local == utc);                 // True
```
To include the Offset in the comparison, you must use the EqualsExact method:
```c#
Console.WriteLine (local.EqualsExact (utc));      // False
```

# TimeZoneInfo
The TimeZoneInfo class provides information on time zone names, UTC offsets, and Daylight Saving Time rules.

## TimeZone
The static TimeZone.CurrentTimeZone method returns a TimeZone:
```c#
TimeZone zone = TimeZone.CurrentTimeZone;
Console.WriteLine (zone.StandardName);      // Pacific Standard Time
Console.WriteLine (zone.DaylightName);      // Pacific Daylight Time
```
The GetDaylightChanges method returns specific Daylight Saving Time information for a given year:
```c#
DaylightTime day = zone.GetDaylightChanges (2019);
Console.WriteLine (day.Start.ToString ("M"));       // 10 March
Console.WriteLine (day.End.ToString ("M"));         // 03 November
Console.WriteLine (day.Delta);                      // 01:00:00
```

## TimeZoneInfo
The static `TimeZoneInfo.Local` method returns a TimeZoneInfo object based on the current local settings. The following demonstrates the result if run in California:
```c#
TimeZoneInfo zone = TimeZoneInfo.Local;
Console.WriteLine (zone.StandardName);      // Pacific Standard Time
Console.WriteLine (zone.DaylightName);      // Pacific Daylight Time
```
The `IsDaylightSavingTime` and `GetUtcOffset` methods work as follows:
```c#
DateTime dt1 = new DateTime (2019, 1, 1);   // DateTimeOffset works, too
DateTime dt2 = new DateTime (2019, 6, 1);
Console.WriteLine (zone.IsDaylightSavingTime (dt1));     // True
Console.WriteLine (zone.IsDaylightSavingTime (dt2));     // False
Console.WriteLine (zone.GetUtcOffset (dt1));             // -08:00:00
Console.WriteLine (zone.GetUtcOffset (dt2));             // -07:00:00
```
You can obtain a TimeZoneInfo for any of the world’s time zones by calling Find​Sys⁠temTimeZoneById with the zone ID. We’ll switch to Western Australia for reasons that will soon become clear:
```c#
TimeZoneInfo wa = TimeZoneInfo.FindSystemTimeZoneById
                  ("W. Australia Standard Time");

Console.WriteLine (wa.Id);                   // W. Australia Standard Time
Console.WriteLine (wa.DisplayName);          // (GMT+08:00) Perth
Console.WriteLine (wa.BaseUtcOffset);        // 08:00:00
Console.WriteLine (wa.SupportsDaylightSavingTime);     // True
```
The Id property corresponds to the value passed to `FindSystemTimeZoneById`. The static GetSystemTimeZones method returns all world time zones; hence, you can list all valid zone ID strings as follows:
```c#
foreach (TimeZoneInfo z in TimeZoneInfo.GetSystemTimeZones())
  Console.WriteLine (z.Id);
```
Note: You can also create a custom time zone by calling TimeZoneInfo.CreateCustomTimeZone. Because TimeZoneInfo is immutable, you must pass in all the relevant data as method arguments.

You can serialize a predefined or custom time zone to a (semi) human-readable string by calling ToSerializedString—and deserialize it by calling TimeZoneInfo.FromSerializedString.

The static `ConvertTime` method converts a DateTime or DateTimeOffset from one time zone to another. You can include either just a destination TimeZoneInfo, or both source and destination TimeZoneInfo objects. You can also convert directly from or to UTC with the methods `ConvertTimeFromUtc` and `ConvertTimeToUtc`.

For working with Daylight Saving Time, TimeZoneInfo provides the following additional methods:
  - `IsInvalidTime` returns true if a DateTime is within the hour (or delta) that’s skipped when the clocks move forward.
  - `IsAmbiguousTime` returns true if a DateTime or DateTimeOffset is within the hour (or delta) that’s repeated when the clocks move back.
  - `GetAmbiguousTimeOffsets` returns an array of TimeSpans representing the valid offset choices for an ambiguous DateTime or DateTimeOffset.

You can’t obtain simple dates from a TimeZoneInfo indicating the start and end of Daylight Saving Time. Instead, you must call GetAdjustmentRules, which returns a declarative summary of all daylight saving rules that apply to all years. Each rule has a DateStart and DateEnd indicating the date range within which the rule is valid:

foreach (TimeZoneInfo.AdjustmentRule rule in wa.GetAdjustmentRules())
  Console.WriteLine ("Rule: applies from " + rule.DateStart +
                                    " to " + rule.DateEnd);
Western Australia first introduced Daylight Saving Time in 2006, midseason (and then rescinded it in 2009). This required a special rule for the first year; hence, there are two rules:

Rule: applies from 1/01/2006 12:00:00 AM to 31/12/2006 12:00:00 AM
Rule: applies from 1/01/2007 12:00:00 AM to 31/12/2009 12:00:00 AM
Each AdjustmentRule has a DaylightDelta property of type TimeSpan (this is one hour in almost every case) and properties called DaylightTransitionStart and DaylightTransitionEnd. The latter two are of type TimeZoneInfo.TransitionTime, which has the following properties:

public bool IsFixedDateRule { get; }
public DayOfWeek DayOfWeek { get; }
public int Week { get; }
public int Day { get; }
public int Month { get; }
public DateTime TimeOfDay { get; }
A transition time is somewhat complicated in that it needs to represent both fixed and floating dates. An example of a floating date is “the last Sunday in March.” Here are the rules for interpreting a transition time:

If, for an end transition, IsFixedDateRule is true, Day is 1, Month is 1, and TimeOfDay is DateTime.MinValue, there is no end to Daylight Saving Time in that year (this can happen only in the southern hemisphere, upon the initial introduction of daylight saving time to a region).

Otherwise, if IsFixedDateRule is true, the Month, Day, and TimeOfDay properties determine the start or end of the adjustment rule.

Otherwise, if IsFixedDateRule is false, the Month, DayOfWeek, Week, and TimeOfDay properties determine the start or end of the adjustment rule.

In the last case, Week refers to the week of the month, with “5” meaning the last week. We can demonstrate this by enumerating the adjustment rules for our wa time zone:

foreach (TimeZoneInfo.AdjustmentRule rule in wa.GetAdjustmentRules())
{
  Console.WriteLine ("Rule: applies from " + rule.DateStart +
                                    " to " + rule.DateEnd);

  Console.WriteLine ("   Delta: " + rule.DaylightDelta);

  Console.WriteLine ("   Start: " + FormatTransitionTime
                                   (rule.DaylightTransitionStart, false));

  Console.WriteLine ("   End:   " + FormatTransitionTime
                                   (rule.DaylightTransitionEnd, true));
  Console.WriteLine();
}
In FormatTransitionTime, we honor the rules just described:
```c#
static string FormatTransitionTime (TimeZoneInfo.TransitionTime tt,
                                    bool endTime)
{
  if (endTime && tt.IsFixedDateRule
              && tt.Day == 1 && tt.Month == 1
              && tt.TimeOfDay == DateTime.MinValue)
    return "-";

  string s;
  if (tt.IsFixedDateRule)
    s = tt.Day.ToString();
  else
    s = "The " +
        "first second third fourth last".Split() [tt.Week - 1] +
        " " + tt.DayOfWeek + " in";

  return s + " " + DateTimeFormatInfo.CurrentInfo.MonthNames [tt.Month-1]
           + " at " + tt.TimeOfDay.TimeOfDay;
}
```

# Daylight Saving Time and DateTime
If you use a DateTimeOffset or a UTC DateTime, equality comparisons are unimpeded by the effects of Daylight Saving Time. But with local DateTimes, daylight saving can be problematic.

We can summarize the rules as follows:
  - Daylight saving affects local time but not UTC time.
  - When the clocks turn back, comparisons that rely on time moving forward will break if (and only if) they use local DateTimes.
  - You can always reliably round-trip between UTC and local times (on the same computer)—even as the clocks turn back.

The `IsDaylightSavingTime` tells you whether a given local DateTime is subject to Daylight Saving Time. UTC times always return false:
```c#
Console.Write (DateTime.Now.IsDaylightSavingTime());     // True or False
Console.Write (DateTime.UtcNow.IsDaylightSavingTime());  // Always False
```
Assuming dto is a DateTimeOffset, the following expression does the same:
```c#
dto.LocalDateTime.IsDaylightSavingTime
```
The end of Daylight Saving Time presents a particular complication for algorithms that use local time, because when the clocks go back, the same hour (or more precisely, Delta) repeats itself.
`NOTE`: You can reliably compare any two DateTimes by first calling ToUniversalTime on each. This strategy fails if (and only if) exactly one of them has a DateTimeKind of Unspecified. This potential for failure is another reason for favoring DateTimeOffset.