# Globalization
There are two aspects to internationalizing an application: globalization and localization.

Globalization is concerned with three tasks (in decreasing order of importance):

Making sure that your program doesn’t break when run in another culture

Respecting a local culture’s formatting rules; for instance, when displaying dates

Designing your program so that it picks up culture-specific data and strings from satellite assemblies that you can later write and deploy

Localization means concluding that last task by writing satellite assemblies for specific cultures. You can do this after writing your program (we cover the details in “Resources and Satellite Assemblies”).

.NET helps you with the second task by applying culture-specific rules by default. We’ve already seen how calling ToString on a DateTime or number respects local formatting rules. Unfortunately, this makes it easy to fail the first task and have your program break because you’re expecting dates or numbers to be formatted according to an assumed culture. The solution, as we’ve seen, is either to specify a culture (such as the invariant culture) when formatting and parsing or to use culture-independent methods such as those in XmlConvert.

# Globalization Checklist
We’ve already covered the important points in this chapter. Here’s a summary of the essential work required:

  - Understand `Unicode and text encodings` (see “Text Encodings and Unicode”).
  - Be mindful that methods such as `ToUpper and ToLower` on char and string are culture sensitive: use ToUpperInvariant/ToLowerInvariant unless you want culture sensitivity.
  - Favor culture-independent `formatting and parsing mechanisms for DateTime and DateTimeOffsets` such as ToString("o") and XmlConvert.
  - Otherwise, specify `a culture when formatting/parsing numbers or date/times` (unless you want local-culture behavior).

# Testing
You can test against different cultures by reassigning Thread’s CurrentCulture property (in System.Threading). The following changes the current culture to Turkey:
```c#
Thread.CurrentThread.CurrentCulture = CultureInfo.GetCultureInfo ("tr-TR");
```
Turkey is a particularly good test case because:
  - "i".ToUpper() != "I" and "I".ToLower() != "i".
  - Dates are formatted as day.month.year (note the period separator).
  - The decimal point indicator is a comma instead of a period.

You can also experiment by changing the number and date formatting settings in the Windows Control Panel: these are reflected in the default culture (Cultur⁠e​Info.CurrentCulture).

CultureInfo.GetCultures() returns an array of all available cultures.

`NOTE`
Thread and CultureInfo also support a CurrentUICulture property. This is concerned more with localization