
# Hashing

A hashing algorithm distills a potentially large number of bytes into a small fixed- length hashcode. Hashing algorithms are designed such that a single-bit change anywhere in the source data results in a significantly different hashcode. This makes it suitable for comparing files or detecting accidental (or malicious) corruption to a file or data stream.
Hashing also acts as one-way encryption, because it’s difficult to impossible to convert a hashcode back into the original data. This makes it ideal for storing passwords in a database, because should your database become compromised, you don’t want the attacker to gain access to plain-text passwords. To authenticate, you simply hash what the user types in and compare it to the hash that’s stored in the database.
To hash, you call ComputeHash on one of the HashAlgorithm subclasses, such as SHA1 or SHA256:
    byte[] hash;
    using (Stream fs = File.OpenRead ("checkme.doc"))
hash = SHA1.Create().ComputeHash (fs); // SHA1 hash is 20 bytes long
The ComputeHash method also accepts a byte array, which is convenient for hashing passwords (we describe a more secure technique in “Hashing Passwords” on page 854):
    byte[] data = System.Text.Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes ("stRhong%pword");
    byte[] hash = SHA256.Create().ComputeHash (data);

The `GetBytes` method on an Encoding object converts a string to a byte array; the GetString method converts it back. An Encoding object cannot, however, convert an encrypted or hashed byte array to a string, because scram‐ bled data usually violates text encoding rules. Instead, use Con vert.ToBase64String and Convert.FromBase64String: these convert between any byte array and a legal (and XML- or JSON-friendly) string.

# Hash Algorithms in .NET
SHA1 and SHA256 are two of the HashAlgorithm subtypes provided by .NET. Here are all the major algorithms, in ascending order of security (and hash length, in bytes):
  `  MD5(16) → SHA1(20) → SHA256(32) → SHA384(48) → SHA512(64)`

`MD5 and SHA1 are currently the fastest algorithms`, although the other algorithms are not more than (roughly) two times slower in their current implementations. To give a ballpark figure, you can expect a performance of more than 100 MB per second with any of these algorithms on today’s typical desktop or server. The longer hashes decrease the possibility of collision (two distinct files yielding the same hash).

Use at least `SHA256` when hashing passwords or other security- sensitive data.` MD5 and SHA1` are considered insecure for this purpose and are suitable to protect only against accidental corruption, not deliberate tampering.

# Hashing Passwords
`The longer SHA algorithms are suitable as a basis for password hashing`, if you enforce a strong password policy to mitigate a dictionary attack—a strategy whereby an attacker builds a password lookup table by hashing every word in a dictionary.

A standard technique, when hashing passwords, is to incorporate `“salt” a long series of bytes that you initially obtain via a random number generator and then combine with each password before hashing`. This frustrates hackers in two ways:
  • They must also know the `salt bytes`.
  • They cannot use `rainbow tables` (publicly available precomputed databases of passwords and their hashcodes), although a dictionary attack might still be possible with sufficient computing power.

You can further `strengthen` security by `“stretching”` your password hashes—repeatedly rehashing to obtain more computationally intensive byte sequences. If you rehash 100 times, a dictionary attack that might otherwise take one month would take eight years. `The KeyDerivation, Rfc2898DeriveBytes, and PasswordDerive Bytes` classes perform exactly this kind of stretching while also allowing for conve‐ nient salting. Of these, KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2 offers the best hashing:
```c#
byte[] encrypted = KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2 (
        password: "stRhong%pword",
        salt: Encoding.UTF8.GetBytes ("j78Y#p)/saREN!y3@"),
        prf: KeyDerivationPrf.HMACSHA512,
        iterationCount: 100,
        numBytesRequested: 64);
```

`KeyDerivation.Pbkdf2` requires the NuGet package `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Cryptography.KeyDerivation`. Though it’s in the ASP.NET Core namespace, any .NET application can use it.


`KeyDerivation`: The KeyDerivation class is a generic class that provides methods for key derivation. It allows you to derive keys from a given secret value or password using different algorithms and parameters. It is often used in combination with other cryptographic functions.

`Rfc2898DeriveBytes`: The Rfc2898DeriveBytes class is a specific implementation of the PBKDF2 (Password-Based Key Derivation Function 2) algorithm defined in the RFC 2898 specification. PBKDF2 is a widely-used key derivation function that adds a significant amount of computational effort, known as "stretching," to derive a cryptographic key from a password. It uses a salt and an iteration count to make the key derivation process more time-consuming, thereby increasing the difficulty of brute-force attacks.

`PasswordDeriveBytes`: The PasswordDeriveBytes class is another implementation of the key derivation function. It is commonly used in older versions of .NET framework. It derives a cryptographic key from a password using the PBKDF1 algorithm, which is an earlier version of PBKDF2. PBKDF1 is considered less secure than PBKDF2, but it may still be used in legacy systems.