# Public-Key Encryption and Signing
Public-key cryptography is asymmetric, meaning that encryption and decryption use different keys.
Unlike symmetric encryption, for which any arbitrary series of bytes of appropriate length can serve as a key, asymmetric cryptography requires specially crafted key pairs. A key pair contains a public key and private key component that work together as follows:
• The `public key encrypts messages`.
• The `private key decrypts messages`.
The party “crafting” a key pair keeps the private key secret while distributing the public key freely. A special feature of this type of cryptography is that you cannot calculate a private key from a public key. So, if the private key is lost, encrypted data cannot be recovered; conversely, if a private key is leaked, the encryption system becomes useless.
A public key handshake allows two computers to communicate securely over a public network, with no prior contact and no existing shared secret. To see how

this works, suppose that computer Origin wants to send a confidential message to computer Target:
1. Target generates a public/private key pair and then sends its public key to Origin.
2. Origin encrypts the confidential message using Target’s public key and then sends it to Target.
3. Target decrypts the confidential message using its private key. An eavesdropper will see the following:
• Target’s public key
• The secret message, encrypted with Target’s public key

# The RSA Class
.NET provides a number of asymmetric algorithms, of which RSA is the most popular. Here’s how to encrypt and decrypt with RSA:
    byte[] data = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };   // This is what we're encrypting.
    using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
    {
      byte[] encrypted = rsa.Encrypt (data, true);
      byte[] decrypted = rsa.Decrypt (encrypted, true);
    }