
# Windows Data Protection
In the section “File and Directory Operations” on page 699, we described how you could use File.Encrypt to request that the operating system transparently encrypt a file:
    File.WriteAllText ("myfile.txt", "");
    File.Encrypt ("myfile.txt");
    File.AppendAllText ("myfile.txt", "sensitive data");
The encryption in this case uses a key derived from the logged-in user’s pass‐ word. You can use this same implicitly derived key to encrypt a byte array with the Windows Data Protection API (DPAPI). The DPAPI is exposed through the ProtectedData class—a simple type with two static methods:
public static byte[] Protect
(byte[] userData, byte[] optionalEntropy, DataProtectionScope scope);
public static byte[] Unprotect
(byte[] encryptedData, byte[] optionalEntropy, DataProtectionScope scope);
Whatever you include in optionalEntropy is added to the key, thereby increasing its security. The DataProtectionScope enum argument allows two options: Current User or LocalMachine. With CurrentUser, a key is derived from the logged-in user’s credentials; with LocalMachine, a machine-wide key is used, common to all users. This means that with the CurrentUser scope, data encrypted by one user cannot be decrypted by another. A LocalMachine key provides less protection but works under a Windows Service or a program needing to operate under a variety of accounts.
  852 | Chapter 20: Cryptography
Here’s a simple encryption and decryption demonstration:
    byte[] original = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    DataProtectionScope scope = DataProtectionScope.CurrentUser;
byte[] encrypted = ProtectedData.Protect (original, null, scope); byte[] decrypted = ProtectedData.Unprotect (encrypted, null, scope); // decrypted is now {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
Windows Data Protection provides moderate security against an attacker with full access to the computer, depending on the strength of the user’s password. With LocalMachine scope, it’s effective only against those with restricted physical and electronic access.
