# Public-Key Encryption and Signing
Public-key cryptography is asymmetric, meaning that encryption and decryption use different keys.
Unlike symmetric encryption, for which any arbitrary series of bytes of appropriate length can serve as a key, asymmetric cryptography requires specially crafted key pairs. A key pair contains a public key and private key component that work together as follows:
• The public key encrypts messages.
• The private key decrypts messages.

The party “crafting” a key pair keeps the private key secret while distributing the public key freely. A special feature of this type of cryptography is that `you cannot calculate a private key from a public key`. So, `if the private key is lost, encrypted data cannot be recovered; conversely, if a private key is leaked, the encryption system becomes useless.`

A public key handshake allows two computers to communicate securely over a public network, with no prior contact and no existing shared secret. To see how this works, suppose that computer Origin wants to send a confidential message to computer Target:
1. Target generates a public/private key pair and then sends its public key to Origin.
2. Origin encrypts the confidential message using Target’s public key and then sends it to Target.
3. Target decrypts the confidential message using its private key.

An eavesdropper will see the following:
• Target’s public key
• The secret message, encrypted with Target’s public key

But without Target’s private key, the message cannot be decrypted.
This doesn’t prevent against a man-in-the-middle attack: in other words, Origin cannot know that Target isn’t some mali‐ cious party. To authenticate the recipient, the originator needs to already know the recipient’s public key or be able to validate its key through a digital site certificate.

Because public key encryption is relatively slow and its message size limited, the secret message sent from Origin to Target typically contains a fresh key for subse‐ quent symmetric encryption. This allows public key encryption to be abandoned for the remainder of the session, in favor of a symmetric algorithm capable of handling larger messages. This protocol is particularly secure if a fresh public/private key pair is generated for each session because no keys then need to be stored on either computer.