# Immutable Objects
An `immutable object` is one whose state cannot be altered—externally or internally. The fields in an immutable object are typically declared read-only and are fully initialized during construction.

`Immutability` is a hallmark of functional programming—where instead of mutating an object, you create a new object with different properties. LINQ follows this paradigm. Immutability is also valuable in multithreading in that it avoids the problem of shared writable state—by eliminating (or minimizing) the writable.

One pattern is to use `immutable objects` to encapsulate a group of related fields, to minimize lock durations. To take a very simple example, suppose that we had two fields, as follows:
```c#
    int _percentComplete;
    string _statusMessage;

```
Now let’s assume that we want to read and write them atomically. Rather than locking around these fields, we could define the following immutable class:
```c#

class ProgressStatus
{
    public readonly int PercentComplete;

    public readonly string StatusMessage;

// This class might have many more fields...
    public ProgressStatus(int percentComplete, string statusMessage)
    {
        PercentComplete = percentComplete;
        StatusMessage = statusMessage;
    }
}
```

Then we could define a single field of that type, along with a locking object:
readonly object _statusLocker = new object(); ProgressStatus _status;
We can now read and write values of that type without holding a lock for more than a single assignment:
```c#
var status = new ProgressStatus (50, "Working on it");
// Imagine we were assigning many more fields...
// ...
lock (_statusLocker) _status = status; // Very brief lock
```
To read the object, we first obtain a copy of the object reference (within a lock). Then, we can read its values without needing to hold onto the lock:
```c#
ProgressStatus status;
    lock (_statusLocker) status = _status;
    int pc = status.PercentComplete;
    string msg = status.StatusMessage;
    ...
```