# XmlReader
XmlReader is a high-performance class for reading an XML stream in a low-level, forward-only manner.

Consider the following XML file, customer.xml:

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="yes"?>
<customer id="123" status="archived">
  <firstname>Jim</firstname>
  <lastname>Bo</lastname>
</customer>
To instantiate an XmlReader, you call the static XmlReader.Create method, passing in a Stream, a TextReader, or a URI string:

using XmlReader reader = XmlReader.Create ("customer.xml");
  ...
NOTE
Because XmlReader lets you read from potentially slow sources (Streams and URIs), it offers asynchronous versions of most of its methods so that you can easily write nonblocking code. We cover asynchrony in detail in Chapter 14.

To construct an XmlReader that reads from a string:

using XmlReader reader = XmlReader.Create (
  new System.IO.StringReader (myString));
You can also pass in an XmlReaderSettings object to control parsing and validation options. The following three properties on XmlReaderSettings are particularly useful for skipping over superfluous content:

bool IgnoreComments                  // Skip over comment nodes?
bool IgnoreProcessingInstructions    // Skip over processing instructions?
bool IgnoreWhitespace                // Skip over whitespace?
In the following example, we instruct the reader not to emit whitespace nodes, which are a distraction in typical scenarios:

XmlReaderSettings settings = new XmlReaderSettings();
settings.IgnoreWhitespace = true;

using XmlReader reader = XmlReader.Create ("customer.xml", settings);
  ...
Another useful property on XmlReaderSettings is ConformanceLevel. Its default value of Document instructs the reader to assume a valid XML document with a single root node. This is a problem if you want to read just an inner portion of XML, containing multiple nodes:

<firstname>Jim</firstname>
<lastname>Bo</lastname>
To read this without throwing an exception, you must set ConformanceLevel to Fragment.

XmlReaderSettings also has a property called CloseInput, which indicates whether to close the underlying stream when the reader is closed (there’s an analogous property on XmlWriterSettings called CloseOutput). The default value for CloseInput and CloseOutput is false.

# Reading Nodes
The units of an XML stream are XML nodes. The reader traverses the stream in textual (depth-first) order. The Depth property of the reader returns the current depth of the cursor.

The most primitive way to read from an XmlReader is to call Read. It advances to the next node in the XML stream, rather like MoveNext in IEnumerator. The first call to Read positions the cursor at the first node. When Read returns false, it means the cursor has advanced past the last node, at which point the XmlReader should be closed and abandoned.

Two string properties on XmlReader provide access to a node’s content: Name and Value. Depending on the node type, either Name or Value (or both) are populated.

In this example, we read every node in the XML stream, outputting each node type as we go:

XmlReaderSettings settings = new XmlReaderSettings();
settings.IgnoreWhitespace = true;

using XmlReader reader = XmlReader.Create ("customer.xml", settings);
while (reader.Read())
{
  Console.Write (new string (' ', reader.Depth * 2));  // Write indentation
  Console.Write (reader.NodeType.ToString());

  if (reader.NodeType == XmlNodeType.Element ||
      reader.NodeType == XmlNodeType.EndElement)
  {
    Console.Write (" Name=" + reader.Name);
  }
  else if (reader.NodeType == XmlNodeType.Text)
  {
    Console.Write (" Value=" + reader.Value);
  }  
  Console.WriteLine ();
}
The output is as follows:

XmlDeclaration
Element Name=customer
  Element Name=firstname
    Text Value=Jim
  EndElement Name=firstname
  Element Name=lastname
    Text Value=Bo
  EndElement Name=lastname
EndElement Name=customer
NOTE
Attributes are not included in Read-based traversal (see “Reading Attributes”).

NodeType is of type XmlNodeType, which is an enum with these members:

None
XmlDeclaration
Element
EndElement
Text
Attribute	Comment
Entity
EndEntity
EntityReference
ProcessingInstruction
CDATA	Document
DocumentType
DocumentFragment
Notation
Whitespace
SignificantWhitespace
Reading Elements
Often, you already know the structure of the XML document that you’re reading. To help with this, XmlReader provides a range of methods that read while presuming a particular structure. This simplifies your code as well as performing some validation at the same time.

NOTE
XmlReader throws an XmlException if any validation fails. XmlException has LineNumber and LinePosition properties indicating where the error occurred—logging this information is essential if the XML file is large!

ReadStartElement verifies that the current NodeType is Element and then calls Read. If you specify a name, it verifies that it matches that of the current element.

ReadEndElement verifies that the current NodeType is EndElement and then calls Read.

For instance, we could read this:

<firstname>Jim</firstname>
as follows:

reader.ReadStartElement ("firstname");
Console.WriteLine (reader.Value);
reader.Read();
reader.ReadEndElement();
The ReadElementContentAsString method does all of this in one hit. It reads a start element, a text node, and an end element, returning the content as a string:

string firstName = reader.ReadElementContentAsString ("firstname", "");
The second argument refers to the namespace, which is blank in this example. There are also typed versions of this method, such as ReadElementContentAsInt, which parse the result. Returning to our original XML document:

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="yes"?>
<customer id="123" status="archived">
  <firstname>Jim</firstname>
  <lastname>Bo</lastname>
  <creditlimit>500.00</creditlimit>    <!-- OK, we sneaked this in! -->
</customer>
We could read it in as follows:

XmlReaderSettings settings = new XmlReaderSettings();
settings.IgnoreWhitespace = true;

using XmlReader r = XmlReader.Create ("customer.xml", settings);

r.MoveToContent();                // Skip over the XML declaration
r.ReadStartElement ("customer");
string firstName    = r.ReadElementContentAsString ("firstname", "");
string lastName     = r.ReadElementContentAsString ("lastname", "");
decimal creditLimit = r.ReadElementContentAsDecimal ("creditlimit", "");

r.MoveToContent();      // Skip over that pesky comment
r.ReadEndElement();     // Read the closing customer tag
NOTE
The MoveToContent method is really useful. It skips over all the fluff: XML declarations, whitespace, comments, and processing instructions. You can also instruct the reader to do most of this automatically through the properties on XmlReaderSettings.

Optional elements
In the previous example, suppose that <lastname> was optional. The solution to this is straightforward:

r.ReadStartElement ("customer");
string firstName    = r. ReadElementContentAsString ("firstname", "");
string lastName     = r.Name == "lastname"
                      ? r.ReadElementContentAsString() : null;
decimal creditLimit = r.ReadElementContentAsDecimal ("creditlimit", "");
Random element order
The examples in this section rely on elements appearing in the XML file in a set order. If you need to cope with elements appearing in any order, the easiest solution is to read that section of the XML into an X-DOM. We describe how to do this later in “Patterns for Using XmlReader/XmlWriter”.

Empty elements
The way that XmlReader handles empty elements presents a horrible trap. Consider the following element:

<customerList></customerList>
In XML, this is equivalent to the following:

<customerList/>
And yet, XmlReader treats the two differently. In the first case, the following code works as expected:

reader.ReadStartElement ("customerList");
reader.ReadEndElement();
In the second case, ReadEndElement throws an exception because there is no separate “end element” as far as XmlReader is concerned. The workaround is to check for an empty element:

bool isEmpty = reader.IsEmptyElement;
reader.ReadStartElement ("customerList");
if (!isEmpty) reader.ReadEndElement();
In reality, this is a nuisance only when the element in question might contain child elements (such as a customer list). With elements that wrap simple text (such as firstname), you can avoid the entire issue by calling a method such as ReadElementContentAsString. The ReadElementXXX methods handle both kinds of empty elements correctly.

Other ReadXXX methods
Table 11-1 summarizes all ReadXXX methods in XmlReader. Most of these are designed to work with elements. The sample XML fragment shown in bold is the section read by the method described.

Table 11-1. Read methods
Members	Works on NodeType	Sample XML fragment	Input parameters	Data returned
ReadContentAsXXX	Text	<a>x</a>		x
ReadElement​Con⁠tent​AsXXX	Element	<a>x</a>		x
ReadInnerXml	Element	<a>x</a>		x
ReadOuterXml	Element	<a>x</a>		<a>x</a>
ReadStartElement	Element	<a>x</a>		
ReadEndElement	Element	<a>x</a>		
ReadSubtree	Element	<a>x</a>		<a>x</a>
ReadToDescendant	Element	<a>x<b></b></a>	"b"	
ReadToFollowing	Element	<a>x<b></b></a>	"b"	
ReadToNextSibling	Element	<a>x</a><b></b>	"b"	
ReadAttributeValue	Attribute	See “Reading Attributes”		
The ReadContentAsXXX methods parse a text node into type XXX. Internally, the XmlConvert class performs the string-to-type conversion. The text node can be within an element or an attribute.

The ReadElementContentAsXXX methods are wrappers around corresponding ReadContentAsXXX methods. They apply to the element node rather than the text node enclosed by the element.

ReadInnerXml is typically applied to an element, and it reads and returns an element and all its descendants. When applied to an attribute, it returns the value of the attribute. ReadOuterXml is the same except that it includes rather than excludes the element at the cursor position.

ReadSubtree returns a proxy reader that provides a view over just the current element (and its descendants). The proxy reader must be closed before the original reader can be safely read again. When the proxy reader is closed, the cursor position of the original reader moves to the end of the subtree.

ReadToDescendant moves the cursor to the start of the first descendant node with the specified name/namespace. ReadToFollowing moves the cursor to the start of the first node—regardless of depth—with the specified name/namespace. ReadToNextSibling moves the cursor to the start of the first sibling node with the specified name/namespace.

There are also two legacy methods: ReadString and ReadElementString behave like ReadContentAsString and ReadElementContentAsString, except that they throw an exception if there’s more than a single text node within the element. You should avoid these methods because they throw an exception if an element contains a comment.

# Reading Attributes
XmlReader provides an indexer giving you direct (random) access to an element’s attributes—by name or position. Using the indexer is equivalent to calling GetAttribute.

Given the XML fragment

<customer id="123" status="archived"/>
we could read its attributes, as follows:

Console.WriteLine (reader ["id"]);              // 123
Console.WriteLine (reader ["status"]);          // archived
Console.WriteLine (reader ["bogus"] == null);   // True
WARNING
The XmlReader must be positioned on a start element in order to read attributes. After calling ReadStartElement, the attributes are gone forever!

Although attribute order is semantically irrelevant, you can access attributes by their ordinal position. We could rewrite the preceding example as follows:

Console.WriteLine (reader [0]);            // 123
Console.WriteLine (reader [1]);            // archived
The indexer also lets you specify the attribute’s namespace—if it has one.

AttributeCount returns the number of attributes for the current node.

Attribute nodes
To explicitly traverse attribute nodes, you must make a special diversion from the normal path of just calling Read. A good reason to do so is if you want to parse attribute values into other types, via the ReadContentAsXXX methods.

The diversion must begin from a start element. To make the job easier, the forward-only rule is relaxed during attribute traversal: you can jump to any attribute (forward or backward) by calling MoveToAttribute.

NOTE
MoveToElement returns you to the start element from anyplace within the attribute node diversion.

Returning to our previous example:

<customer id="123" status="archived"/>
we can do this:

reader.MoveToAttribute ("status");
string status = reader.ReadContentAsString();

reader.MoveToAttribute ("id");
int id = reader.ReadContentAsInt();
MoveToAttribute returns false if the specified attribute doesn’t exist.

You can also traverse each attribute in sequence by calling the MoveToFirstAttribute and then the MoveToNextAttribute methods:

if (reader.MoveToFirstAttribute())
  do { Console.WriteLine (reader.Name + "=" + reader.Value);  }
  while (reader.MoveToNextAttribute());

// OUTPUT:
id=123
status=archived
Namespaces and Prefixes
XmlReader provides two parallel systems for referring to element and attribute names:

Name

NamespaceURI and LocalName

Whenever you read an element’s Name property or call a method that accepts a single name argument, you’re using the first system. This works well if no namespaces or prefixes are present; otherwise, it acts in a crude and literal manner. Namespaces are ignored, and prefixes are included exactly as they were written; for example:

Sample fragment	Name
<customer ...>	customer
<customer xmlns='blah' ...>	customer
<x:customer ...>	x:customer
The following code works with the first two cases:

reader.ReadStartElement ("customer");
The following is required to handle the third case:

reader.ReadStartElement ("x:customer");
The second system works through two namespace-aware properties: NamespaceURI and LocalName. These properties take into account prefixes and default namespaces defined by parent elements. Prefixes are automatically expanded. This means that NamespaceURI always reflects the semantically correct namespace for the current element, and LocalName is always free of prefixes.

When you pass two name arguments into a method such as ReadStartElement, you’re using this same system. For example, consider the following XML:

<customer xmlns="DefaultNamespace" xmlns:other="OtherNamespace">
  <address>
    <other:city>
    ...
We could read this as follows:

reader.ReadStartElement ("customer", "DefaultNamespace");
reader.ReadStartElement ("address",  "DefaultNamespace");
reader.ReadStartElement ("city",     "OtherNamespace");
Abstracting away prefixes is usually exactly what you want. If necessary, you can see what prefix was used through the Prefix property and convert it into a namespace by calling LookupNamespace.

