# when to use Task.FromTask and value task? 
`Task.FromResult` and ValueTask are both used to return a result synchronously from an asynchronous method. However, there are some differences between them that can affect when and how you use them.

`Task.FromResult `is a method that returns a completed Task object with a specified result. It is useful when you need to return a result from an asynchronous method that can be completed synchronously. For example, if you have an asynchronous method that performs a calculation and returns a result, you can use `Task.FromResult` to return the result synchronously if the calculation can be performed quickly without blocking:

```c#
async Task<int> CalculateAsync(int x, int y)
{
    if (x + y < 100)
    {
        // Calculation can be performed synchronously
        return x + y;
    }
    else
    {
        // Calculation is performed asynchronously
        return await PerformCalculationAsync(x, y);
    }
}

```

In this example, if x + y is less than 100, the calculation can be performed synchronously, so we use Task.FromResult to return the result without waiting for an asynchronous operation to complete.

`ValueTask` is a lightweight structure that represents an asynchronous operation that may or may not allocate memory on the heap. It is useful when you need to reduce memory allocation overhead for frequently called asynchronous methods. If an asynchronous method returns a ValueTask object, the caller can either await it or get a Task object from it using the AsTask method if they need to wait for the operation to complete asynchronously:
```c#
async ValueTask<int> CalculateAsync(int x, int y)
{
    if (x + y < 100)
    {
        // Calculation can be performed synchronously
        return x + y;
    }
    else
    {
        // Calculation is performed asynchronously
        return await PerformCalculationAsync(x, y);
    }
}

```

In this example, we use ValueTask instead of Task to reduce memory allocation overhead. If the calculation can be performed synchronously, we return the result directly as a value type without allocating a heap object.

In general, you should use `Task.FromResult` when you need to return a result synchronously from an asynchronous method that can be completed quickly without blocking. You should use `ValueTask` when you need to reduce memory allocation overhead for frequently called asynchronous methods that may or may not allocate memory on the heap. However, it's worth noting that the decision to use one or the other can also depend on other factors, such as the overall design of your code and performance requirements.