
# Working with AggregateException
As we’ve seen, PLINQ, the Parallel class, and Tasks automatically marshal excep‐ tions to the consumer. To see why this is essential, consider the following LINQ query, which throws a DivideByZeroException on the first iteration:
```c#
try {
      var query = from i in Enumerable.Range (0, 1000000)
                  select 100 / i;
}
catch (DivideByZeroException)
{
}
```
If we asked `PLINQ` to parallelize this query and it ignored the handling of excep‐ tions, a `DivideByZeroException` would probably be `thrown on a separate thread`, `bypassing our catch block and causing the application to die.`

Hence, exceptions are automatically caught and rethrown to the caller. But unfortu‐ nately, it’s not quite as simple as catching a DivideByZeroException. Because these libraries utilize many threads, it’s actually possible for two or more exceptions to be thrown simultaneously. To ensure that all exceptions are reported, exceptions are therefore wrapped in an AggregateException container, which exposes an Inner Exceptions property containing each of the caught exception(s):

```c#
try {
     var query = from i in ParallelEnumerable.Range (0, 1000000)
                  select 100 / i;
      // Enumerate query
}
catch (AggregateException aex) {
    foreach (Exception ex in aex.InnerExceptions) Console.WriteLine (ex.Message);
}
```
`Note`: Both PLINQ and the Parallel class end the query or loop execution upon encountering the first exception—by not pro‐ cessing any further elements or loop bodies. More exceptions might be thrown, however, before the current cycle is com‐ plete. The first exception in `AggregateException` is visible in the `InnerException` property.

# Flatten and Handle
The AggregateException class provides a couple of methods to simplify exception handling: `Flatten and Handle`.

## Flatten
Flattens an `AggregateException` instances into a single, new instance.

`AggregateExceptions` will quite often contain other `AggregateExceptions`. An example of when this might happen is if a child task throws an exception. You can eliminate any level of nesting to simplify handling by calling Flatten. This method returns a new AggregateException with a simple flat list of inner exceptions:
```c#
catch (AggregateException aex)
{
  foreach (Exception ex in aex.Flatten().InnerExceptions) myLogWriter.LogException (ex);
}
```
## Handle
Sometimes, it’s useful to catch only specific exception types and have other types rethrown. The Handle method on `AggregateException` provides a shortcut for doing this. It accepts an exception predicate, which it runs over every inner exception:
```c#
public void Handle (Func<Exception, bool> predicate)
```
If the predicate returns true, it considers that exception “handled.” After the dele‐
gate has run over every exception, the following happens:
  - If all exceptions were “handled” (the delegate returned true), the exception is not rethrown.
  - If there were any exceptions for which the delegate returned false (“unhan‐ dled”), a new AggregateException is built up containing those exceptions and is rethrown.

For instance, the following ends up rethrowing another `AggregateException` that contains a single `NullReferenceException`:

```c#

var parent = Task.Factory.StartNew(() =>
{
    // We’ll throw 3 exceptions at once using 3 child tasks:
    int[] numbers = { 0 };
    var childFactory = new TaskFactory
        (TaskCreationOptions.AttachedToParent, TaskContinuationOptions.None);
    childFactory.StartNew(() => 5 / numbers[0]); // Division by zero
    childFactory.StartNew(() => numbers[1]); // Index out of range
    childFactory.StartNew(() => { throw null; }); // Null reference
});
try
{
    parent.Wait();
}
catch (AggregateException aex)
{
    aex.Flatten().Handle(ex =>
    {
        // Note that we still need to call Flatten
        if (ex is DivideByZeroException)
        {
            Console.WriteLine("Divide by zero");
            return true;
        }

        if (ex is IndexOutOfRangeException)
        {
            // This exception is "handled"
            Console.WriteLine("Index out of range");
            return true; // This exception is "handled"
        }

        return false; // All other exceptions will get rethrown
    });
}
```