# Customizable Collections and Proxies
The collection classes discussed in previous sections are convenient in that you can directly instantiate them, but they don’t allow you to control what happens when an item is added to or removed from the collection. With strongly typed collections in an application, you sometimes need this control; for instance:

  - To fire an event when an item is added or removed
  - To update properties because of the added or removed item
  - To detect an “illegal” add/remove operation and throw an exception (for example, if the operation violates a business rule)

The .NET BCL provides collection classes for this exact purpose, in the System.Collections.ObjectModel namespace. These are essentially proxies or wrappers that implement IList<T> or IDictionary<,> by forwarding the methods through to an underlying collection. Each Add, Remove, or Clear operation is routed via a virtual method that acts as a “gateway” when overridden.

Customizable collection classes are commonly used for publicly exposed collections; for instance, a collection of controls exposed publicly on a System​.Win⁠dows.Form class.

Collection<T> and CollectionBase
The Collection<T> class is a customizable wrapper for List<T>.

As well as implementing IList<T> and IList, it defines four additional virtual methods and a protected property as follows:
```c#
public class Collection<T> :
  IList<T>, ICollection<T>, IEnumerable<T>, IList, ICollection, IEnumerable
{
   // ...

   protected virtual void ClearItems();
   protected virtual void InsertItem (int index, T item);
   protected virtual void RemoveItem (int index);
   protected virtual void SetItem (int index, T item);

   protected IList<T> Items { get; }
}
```
The virtual methods provide the gateway by which you can “hook in” to change or enhance the list’s normal behavior. The protected Items property allows the implementer to directly access the “inner list”—this is used to make changes internally without the virtual methods firing.

The virtual methods need not be overridden; they can be left alone until there’s a requirement to alter the list’s default behavior. The following example demonstrates the typical “skeleton” use of Collection<T>:
```c#
Zoo zoo = new Zoo();
zoo.Animals.Add (new Animal ("Kangaroo", 10));
zoo.Animals.Add (new Animal ("Mr Sea Lion", 20));
foreach (Animal a in zoo.Animals) Console.WriteLine (a.Name);

public class Animal
{
  public string Name;
  public int Popularity;

  public Animal (string name, int popularity)
  {
    Name = name; Popularity = popularity;
  }
}

public class AnimalCollection : Collection <Animal>
{
  // AnimalCollection is already a fully functioning list of animals.
  // No extra code is required.
}

public class Zoo   // The class that will expose AnimalCollection.
{                  // This would typically have additional members.

  public readonly AnimalCollection Animals = new AnimalCollection();
}
```
As it stands, AnimalCollection is no more functional than a simple List<Animal>; its role is to provide a base for future extension. To illustrate, let’s now add a Zoo property to Animal so that it can reference the Zoo in which it lives and override each of the virtual methods in Collection<Animal> to maintain that property automatically:
```c#
public class Animal
{
  public string Name;
  public int Popularity;
  public Zoo Zoo { get; internal set; }
  public Animal(string name, int popularity)
  {
    Name = name; Popularity = popularity;
  }
}

public class AnimalCollection : Collection <Animal>
{
  Zoo zoo;
  public AnimalCollection (Zoo zoo) { this.zoo = zoo; }

  protected override void InsertItem (int index, Animal item)
  {
    base.InsertItem (index, item);
    item.Zoo = zoo;
  }
  protected override void SetItem (int index, Animal item)
  {
    base.SetItem (index, item);
    item.Zoo = zoo;
  }
  protected override void RemoveItem (int index)
  {
    this [index].Zoo = null;
    base.RemoveItem (index);
  }
  protected override void ClearItems()
  {
    foreach (Animal a in this) a.Zoo = null;
    base.ClearItems();
  }
}

public class Zoo
{
  public readonly AnimalCollection Animals;
  public Zoo() { Animals = new AnimalCollection (this); }
}
```
Collection<T> also has a constructor accepting an existing IList<T>. Unlike with other collection classes, the supplied list is proxied rather than copied, meaning that subsequent changes will be reflected in the wrapping Collection<T> (although without Collection<T>’s virtual methods firing). Conversely, changes made via the Collection<T> will change the underlying list.

# CollectionBase
CollectionBase is the nongeneric version of Collection<T>. This provides most of the same features as Collection<T> but is clumsier to use. Instead of the template methods InsertItem, RemoveItem, SetItem, and ClearItem, CollectionBase has “hook” methods that double the number of methods required: OnInsert, OnInsertComplete, OnSet, OnSetComplete, OnRemove, OnRemoveComplete, OnClear, and OnClearComplete. Because CollectionBase is nongeneric, you must also implement typed methods when subclassing it—at a minimum, a typed indexer and Add method.

# KeyedCollection<TKey,TItem> and DictionaryBase
KeyedCollection<TKey,TItem> subclasses Collection<TItem>. It both adds and subtracts functionality. What it adds is the ability to access items by key, much like with a dictionary. What it subtracts is the ability to proxy your own inner list.

A keyed collection has some resemblance to an OrderedDictionary in that it combines a linear list with a hashtable. However, unlike OrderedDictionary, it doesn’t implement IDictionary and doesn’t support the concept of a key/value pair. Keys are obtained instead from the items themselves: via the abstract GetKeyForItem method. This means that enumerating a keyed collection is just like enumerating an ordinary list.

You can best think of KeyedCollection<TKey,TItem> as Collection<TItem> plus fast lookup by key.

Because it subclasses Collection<>, a keyed collection inherits all of Collection<>’s functionality, except for the ability to specify an existing list in construction. The additional members it defines are as follows:

public abstract class KeyedCollection <TKey, TItem> : Collection <TItem>

  // ...

  protected abstract TKey GetKeyForItem(TItem item);
  protected void ChangeItemKey(TItem item, TKey newKey);

  // Fast lookup by key - this is in addition to lookup by index.
  public TItem this[TKey key] { get; }

  protected IDictionary<TKey, TItem> Dictionary { get; }
}
GetKeyForItem is what the implementer overrides to obtain an item’s key from the underlying object. The ChangeItemKey method must be called if the item’s key property changes, in order to update the internal dictionary. The Dictionary property returns the internal dictionary used to implement the lookup, which is created when the first item is added. This behavior can be changed by specifying a creation threshold in the constructor, delaying the internal dictionary from being created until the threshold is reached (in the interim, a linear search is performed if an item is requested by key). A good reason not to specify a creation threshold is that having a valid dictionary can be useful in obtaining an ICollection<> of keys, via the Dictionary’s Keys property. This collection can then be passed on to a public property.

The most common use for KeyedCollection<,> is in providing a collection of items accessible both by index and by name. To demonstrate this, let’s revisit the zoo, this time implementing AnimalCollection as a KeyedCollection<string,​Ani⁠mal>:

public class Animal
{
  string name;
  public string Name
  {
    get { return name; }
    set {
      if (Zoo != null) Zoo.Animals.NotifyNameChange (this, value);
      name = value;
    }
  }
  public int Popularity;
  public Zoo Zoo { get; internal set; }

  public Animal (string name, int popularity)
  {
    Name = name; Popularity = popularity;
  }
}

public class AnimalCollection : KeyedCollection <string, Animal>
{
  Zoo zoo;
  public AnimalCollection (Zoo zoo) { this.zoo = zoo; }

  internal void NotifyNameChange (Animal a, string newName) =>
    this.ChangeItemKey (a, newName);

  protected override string GetKeyForItem (Animal item) => item.Name;

  // The following methods would be implemented as in the previous example
  protected override void InsertItem (int index, Animal item)...
  protected override void SetItem (int index, Animal item)...
  protected override void RemoveItem (int index)...
  protected override void ClearItems()...
}

public class Zoo
{
  public readonly AnimalCollection Animals;
  public Zoo() { Animals = new AnimalCollection (this); }
}
The following code demonstrates its use:

Zoo zoo = new Zoo();
zoo.Animals.Add (new Animal ("Kangaroo", 10));
zoo.Animals.Add (new Animal ("Mr Sea Lion", 20));
Console.WriteLine (zoo.Animals [0].Popularity);               // 10
Console.WriteLine (zoo.Animals ["Mr Sea Lion"].Popularity);   // 20
zoo.Animals ["Kangaroo"].Name = "Mr Roo";
Console.WriteLine (zoo.Animals ["Mr Roo"].Popularity);        // 10

# DictionaryBase
The nongeneric version of KeyedCollection is called DictionaryBase. This legacy class takes a very different approach in that it implements IDictionary and uses clumsy hook methods like CollectionBase: OnInsert, OnInsertComplete, OnSet, OnSetComplete, OnRemove, OnRemoveComplete, OnClear, and OnClearComplete (and additionally, OnGet). The primary advantage of implementing IDictionary over taking the KeyedCollection approach is that you don’t need to subclass it in order to obtain keys. But since the very purpose of DictionaryBase is to be subclassed, it’s no advantage at all. The improved model in KeyedCollection is almost certainly due to the fact that it was written some years later, with the benefit of hindsight. DictionaryBase is best considered useful for backward compatibility.
