# WhenAll
Task.WhenAll returns a task that completes when all of the tasks that you pass to it complete. The following completes after three seconds (and demonstrates the fork/join pattern):

```c#
await Task.WhenAll (Delay1(), Delay2(), Delay3());
```
We could get a similar result by awaiting task1, task2, and task3 in turn rather
than using WhenAll:
```c#
Task task1 = Delay1(), task2 = Delay2(), task3 = Delay3();
    await task1; await task2; await task3;
```
The difference (apart from it being less efficient by virtue of requiring three awaits rather than one) is that should `task1 fault, we’ll never get to await task2/task3, and any of their exceptions will go unobserved.`
In contrast, `Task.WhenAll` doesn’t complete until all tasks have completed—even when there’s a fault. And if there are multiple faults, their exceptions are combined into the task’s AggregateException (this is when AggregateException actually becomes useful—should you be interested in all the exceptions, that is). Awaiting the combined task, however, throws only the first exception, so to see all the exceptions, you need to do this:

Calling WhenAll with tasks of type Task<TResult> returns a Task<TResult[]>, giving the combined results of all the tasks. This reduces to a TResult[] when awaited:
```c#
 Task<int> task1 = Task.Run (() => 1);
    Task<int> task2 = Task.Run (() => 2);
    int[] results = await Task.WhenAll (task1, task2);   // { 1, 2 }
```
To give a practical example, the following downloads URIs in parallel and sums their total length:
There’s a slight inefficiency here, though, in that we’re unnecessarily hanging onto the byte arrays that we download until every task is complete. It would be more effi‐ cient if we collapsed byte arrays into their lengths immediately after downloading them. This is where an asynchronous lambda comes in handy because we need to feed an await expression into LINQ’s Select query operator:
```c#
async Task<int> GetTotalSize (string[] uris)
{
  IEnumerable<Task<int>> downloadTasks = uris.Select (async uri => (await new WebClient().DownloadDataTaskAsync (uri)).Length);
  int[] contentLengths = await Task.WhenAll (downloadTasks);
  return contentLengths.Sum();
}
```

# Exceptions
If any of the tasks passed to `Task.WhenAll` throws an exception, the other tasks will continue running until completion. However, once all of the tasks have completed (either successfully or with an exception), Task.WhenAll will return a Task that represents the completion of all the original tasks, including any exceptions that were thrown.

You can use the `Task.Exception` property to get the exception that caused the Task.WhenAll operation to fail. If multiple tasks threw exceptions, the Exception property will contain an AggregateException that aggregates all the exceptions.

```c#
Task task1 = Task.Run(() => { throw null; });
Task task2 = Task.Run(() => { throw null; });
Task task3 = Task.Run(() =>
{
 Thread.Sleep(2000);
 Console.WriteLine("Task 3");
});
Task task4 = Task.Run(() =>
{
 Thread.Sleep(2000);
 Console.WriteLine("Task 4");
});
Task all = Task.WhenAll(task1, task2, task3, task4);
try
{
    await all;
}
catch
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Error count:{all.Exception.InnerExceptions.Count}");
}
//OUTPUT
Task 3
Task 4
Error count:2

```

