# Tuples
Like anonymous types, tuples provide a simple way to store a set of values. The main purpose of tuples is to safely return multiple values from a method without resorting to out parameters (something you cannot do with anonymous types).

NOTE
Tuples do almost everything that anonymous types do and more. Their one disadvantage—as you’ll see soon—is runtime type erasure with named elements.

The simplest way to create a tuple literal is to list the desired values in parentheses. This creates a tuple with unnamed elements, which you refer to as Item1, Item2, and so on:

var bob = ("Bob", 23);    // Allow compiler to infer the element types

Console.WriteLine (bob.Item1);   // Bob
Console.WriteLine (bob.Item2);   // 23
Tuples are value types, with mutable (read/write) elements:

var joe = bob;                 // joe is a *copy* of bob
joe.Item1 = "Joe";             // Change joe’s Item1 from Bob to Joe
Console.WriteLine (bob);       // (Bob, 23)
Console.WriteLine (joe);       // (Joe, 23)
Unlike with anonymous types, you can specify a tuple type explicitly. Just list each of the element types in parentheses:

(string,int) bob  = ("Bob", 23);   
This means that you can usefully return a tuple from a method:

(string,int) person = GetPerson();  // Could use 'var' instead if we want
Console.WriteLine (person.Item1);   // Bob
Console.WriteLine (person.Item2);   // 23

(string,int) GetPerson() => ("Bob", 23);
Tuples play well with generics, so the following types are all legal:

Task<(string,int)>
Dictionary<(string,int),Uri>
IEnumerable<(int id, string name)>   // See below for naming elements

# Naming Tuple Elements
You can optionally give meaningful names to elements when creating tuple literals:

var tuple = (name:"Bob", age:23);

Console.WriteLine (tuple.name);     // Bob
Console.WriteLine (tuple.age);      // 23
You can do the same when specifying tuple types:

var person = GetPerson();
Console.WriteLine (person.name);    // Bob
Console.WriteLine (person.age);     // 23

(string name, int age) GetPerson() => ("Bob", 23);
Note that you can still treat the elements as unnamed and refer to them as Item1, Item2, etc. (although Visual Studio hides these fields from IntelliSense).

Element names are automatically inferred from property or field names:

var now = DateTime.Now;
var tuple = (now.Day, now.Month, now.Year);
Console.WriteLine (tuple.Day);               // OK
Tuples are type compatible with one another if their element types match up (in order). Their element names need not:

(string name, int age, char sex)  bob1 = ("Bob", 23, 'M');
(string age,  int sex, char name) bob2 = bob1;   // No error!
Our particular example leads to confusing results:

Console.WriteLine (bob2.name);    // M
Console.WriteLine (bob2.age);     // Bob
Console.WriteLine (bob2.sex);     // 23

# Type erasure
We stated previously that the C# compiler handles anonymous types by building custom classes with named properties for each of the elements. With tuples, C# works differently and uses a preexisting family of generic structs:

public struct ValueTuple<T1>
public struct ValueTuple<T1,T2>
public struct ValueTuple<T1,T2,T3>
...
Each of the ValueTuple<> structs has fields named Item1, Item2, and so on.

Hence, (string,int) is an alias for ValueTuple<string,int>, and this means that named tuple elements have no corresponding property names in the underlying types. Instead, the names exist only in the source code, and in the imagination of the compiler. At runtime, the names mostly disappear, so if you decompile a program that refers to named tuple elements, you’ll see references to just Item1, Item2, and so on. Further, when you examine a tuple variable in a debugger after having assigned it to an object (or Dump it in LINQPad), the element names are not there. And for the most part, you cannot use reflection (Chapter 18) to determine a tuple’s element names at runtime.

NOTE
We said that the names mostly disappear because there’s an exception. With methods/properties that return named tuple types, the compiler emits the element names by applying a custom attribute called TupleElementNamesAttribute (see “Attributes”) to the member’s return type. This allows named elements to work when calling methods in a different assembly (for which the compiler does not have the source code).

# ValueTuple.Create
You can also create tuples via a factory method on the (nongeneric) ValueTuple type:

ValueTuple<string,int> bob1 = ValueTuple.Create ("Bob", 23);
(string,int)           bob2 = ValueTuple.Create ("Bob", 23);
(string name, int age) bob3 = ValueTuple.Create ("Bob", 23);

# Deconstructing Tuples
Tuples implicitly support the deconstruction pattern (see “Deconstructors”), so you can easily deconstruct a tuple into individual variables. Consider the following:

var bob = ("Bob", 23);

string name = bob.Item1;
int age = bob.Item2;
With the tuple’s deconstructor, you can simplify the code to this:

var bob = ("Bob", 23);

(string name, int age) = bob;   // Deconstruct the bob tuple into
                                // separate variables (name and age).
Console.WriteLine (name);
Console.WriteLine (age);
The syntax for deconstruction is confusingly similar to the syntax for declaring a tuple with named elements. The following highlights the difference:

(string name, int age)      = bob;   // Deconstructing a tuple
(string name, int age) bob2 = bob;   // Declaring a new tuple
Here’s another example, this time when calling a method and with type inference (var):

var (name, age, sex) = GetBob();
Console.WriteLine (name);        // Bob
Console.WriteLine (age);         // 23
Console.WriteLine (sex);         // M

string, int, char) GetBob() => ( "Bob", 23, 'M');
You can also deconstruct directly into fields and properties, which provides a nice shortcut for populating multiple fields or properties in a constructor:

class Point
{
  public readonly int X, Y;
  public Point (int x, int y) => (X, Y) = (x, y);
}

# Equality Comparison
As with anonymous types, the Equals method performs structural equality comparison. This means that it compares the underlying data rather than the reference:

var t1 = ("one", 1);
var t2 = ("one", 1);
Console.WriteLine (t1.Equals (t2));    // True

In addition, ValueTuple<> overloads the == and != operators:

Console.WriteLine (t1 == t2);    // True (from C# 7.3)
Tuples also override the GetHashCode method, making it practical to use tuples as keys in dictionaries. We cover equality comparison in detail in “Equality Comparison”, and dictionaries in Chapter 7.

The ValueTuple<> types also implement IComparable (see “Order Comparison”), making it possible to use tuples as a sorting key.

# The System.Tuple classes
You’ll find another family of generic types in the System namespace called Tuple (rather than ValueTuple). These were introduced back in 2010 and were defined as classes (whereas the ValueTuple types are structs). Defining tuples as classes was in retrospect considered a mistake: in the scenarios in which tuples are commonly used, structs have a slight performance advantage (in that they avoid unnecessary memory allocations), with almost no downside. Hence, when Microsoft added language support for tuples in C# 7, it ignored the existing Tuple types in favor of the new ValueTuple. You might still come across the Tuple classes in code written prior to C# 7. They have no special language support and are used as follows:

Tuple<string,int> t = Tuple.Create ("Bob", 23);  // Factory method 
Console.WriteLine (t.Item1);       // Bob
Console.WriteLine (t.Item2);       // 23