# Operator Overloading
You can overload operators to provide more natural syntax for custom types. Operator overloading is most appropriately used for implementing custom structs that represent fairly primitive data types. For example, a custom numeric type is an excellent candidate for operator overloading.

The following symbolic operators can be overloaded:

+ (unary)	- (unary)	!	˜	++
--	+	-	*	/
%	&	|	^	<<
>>	==	!=	>	<
>=	<=	 	 	 
The following operators are also overloadable:

Implicit and explicit conversions (with the implicit and explicit keywords)

The true and false operators (not literals)

The following operators are indirectly overloaded:

The compound assignment operators (e.g., +=, /=) are implicitly overridden by overriding the noncompound operators (e.g., +, /).

The conditional operators && and || are implicitly overridden by overriding the bitwise operators & and |.

# Operator Functions
You overload an operator by declaring an operator function. An operator function has the following rules:

The name of the function is specified with the operator keyword followed by an operator symbol.

The operator function must be marked static and public.

The parameters of the operator function represent the operands.

The return type of an operator function represents the result of an expression.

At least one of the operands must be the type in which the operator function is declared.

In the following example, we define a struct called Note representing a musical note and then overload the + operator:

public struct Note
{
  int value;
  public Note (int semitonesFromA) { value = semitonesFromA; }
  public static Note operator + (Note x, int semitones)
  {
    return new Note (x.value + semitones);
  }
}
This overload allows us to add an int to a Note:

Note B = new Note (2);
Note CSharp = B + 2;
Overloading an operator automatically overloads the corresponding compound assignment operator. In our example, because we overrode +, we can use += too:

CSharp += 2;
Just as with methods and properties, C# allows operator functions comprising a single expression to be written more tersely with expression-bodied syntax:

public static Note operator + (Note x, int semitones)
                               => new Note (x.value + semitones);

# Overloading Equality and Comparison Operators
Equality and comparison operators are sometimes overridden when writing structs, and in rare cases when writing classes. Special rules and obligations come with overloading the equality and comparison operators, which we explain in Chapter 6. A summary of these rules is as follows:

Pairing
The C# compiler enforces operators that are logical pairs to both be defined. These operators are (== !=), (< >), and (<= >=).
Equals and GetHashCode
In most cases, if you overload (==) and (!=), you must override the Equals and GetHashCode methods defined on object to get meaningful behavior. The C# compiler will give a warning if you do not do this. (See “Equality Comparison” for more details.)
IComparable and IComparable<T>
If you overload (< >) and (<= >=), you should implement IComparable and IComparable<T>.

# Custom Implicit and Explicit Conversions
Implicit and explicit conversions are overloadable operators. These conversions are typically overloaded to make converting between strongly related types (such as numeric types) concise and natural.

To convert between weakly related types, the following strategies are more suitable:

Write a constructor that has a parameter of the type to convert from.

Write ToXXX and (static) FromXXX methods to convert between types.

As explained in the discussion on types, the rationale behind implicit conversions is that they are guaranteed to succeed and not lose information during the conversion. Conversely, an explicit conversion should be required either when runtime circumstances will determine whether the conversion will succeed or if information might be lost during the conversion.

In this example, we define conversions between our musical Note type and a double (which represents the frequency in hertz of that note):

...
// Convert to hertz
public static implicit operator double (Note x)
  => 440 * Math.Pow (2, (double) x.value / 12 );

// Convert from hertz (accurate to the nearest semitone)
public static explicit operator Note (double x)
  => new Note ((int) (0.5 + 12 * (Math.Log (x/440) / Math.Log(2) ) ));
...

Note n = (Note)554.37;  // explicit conversion
double x = n;           // implicit conversion
NOTE
Following our own guidelines, this example might be better implemented with a ToFrequency method (and a static FromFrequency method) instead of implicit and explicit operators.

WARNING
Custom conversions are ignored by the `as and is operators`:

Console.WriteLine (554.37 is Note);   // False
Note n = 554.37 as Note;              // Error

# Overloading true and false
The true and false operators are overloaded in the extremely rare case of types that are Boolean “in spirit” but do not have a conversion to bool. An example is a type that implements three-state logic: by overloading true and false, such a type can work seamlessly with conditional statements and operators—namely, if, do, while, for, &&, ||, and ?:. The System.Data.SqlTypes.SqlBoolean struct provides this functionality:

SqlBoolean a = SqlBoolean.Null;
if (a)
  Console.WriteLine ("True");
else if (!a)
  Console.WriteLine ("False");
else
  Console.WriteLine ("Null");

OUTPUT:
Null
The following code is a reimplementation of the parts of SqlBoolean necessary to demonstrate the true and false operators:

public struct SqlBoolean
{
  public static bool operator true (SqlBoolean x)
    => x.m_value == True.m_value;

  public static bool operator false (SqlBoolean x)
    => x.m_value == False.m_value;  

  public static SqlBoolean operator ! (SqlBoolean x)
  {
    if (x.m_value == Null.m_value)  return Null;
    if (x.m_value == False.m_value) return True;
    return False;
  }

  public static readonly SqlBoolean Null =  new SqlBoolean(0);
  public static readonly SqlBoolean False = new SqlBoolean(1);
  public static readonly SqlBoolean True =  new SqlBoolean(2);

  private SqlBoolean (byte value) { m_value = value; }
  private byte m_value;
}