# XML Documentation
A documentation comment is a piece of embedded XML that documents a type or member. A documentation comment comes immediately before a type or member declaration and starts with three slashes:

/// <summary>Cancels a running query.</summary>
public void Cancel() { ... }
Multiline comments can be done like this:

/// <summary>
/// Cancels a running query
/// </summary>
public void Cancel() { ... }
Or like this (notice the extra star at the start):

/** 
    <summary> Cancels a running query. </summary>
*/
public void Cancel() { ... }
If you add the following option to your .csproj file

<PropertyGroup>
  <DocumentationFile>SomeFile.xml</DocumentationFile>
</PropertyGroup>
the compiler extracts and collates documentation comments into the specified XML file. This has two main uses:

If placed in the same folder as the compiled assembly, tools such as Visual Studio and LINQPad automatically read the XML file and use the information to provide IntelliSense member listings to consumers of the assembly of the same name.

Third-party tools (such as Sandcastle and NDoc) can transform the XML file into an HTML help file.

Standard XML Documentation Tags
Here are the standard XML tags that Visual Studio and documentation generators recognize:

<summary>
<summary>...</summary>
Indicates the tool tip that IntelliSense should display for the type or member, typically a single phrase or sentence.

<remarks>
<remarks>...</remarks>
Additional text that describes the type or member. Documentation generators pick this up and merge it into the bulk of a type’s or member’s description.

<param>
<param name="name">...</param>
Explains a parameter on a method.

<returns>
<returns>...</returns>
Explains the return value for a method.

<exception>
<exception [cref="type"]>...</exception>
Lists an exception that a method can throw (cref refers to the exception type).

<example>
<example>...</example>
Denotes an example (used by documentation generators). This usually contains both description text and source code (source code is typically within a <c> or <code> tag).

<c>
<c>...</c>
Indicates an inline code snippet. This tag is usually used within an <example> block.

<code>
<code>...</code>
Indicates a multiline code sample. This tag is usually used within an <example> block.

<see>
<see cref="member">...</see>
Inserts an inline cross-reference to another type or member. HTML documentation generators typically convert this to a hyperlink. The compiler emits a warning if the type or member name is invalid. To refer to generic types, use curly braces; for example, cref="Foo{T,U}".

<seealso>
<seealso cref="member">...</seealso>
Cross-references another type or member. Documentation generators typically write this into a separate “See Also” section at the bottom of the page.

<paramref>
<paramref name="name"/>
References a parameter from within a <summary> or <remarks> tag.

<list>
<list type=[ bullet | number | table ]>
  <listheader>
    <term>...</term>
    <description>...</description>
  </listheader>
  <item>
    <term>...</term>
    <description>...</description>
  </item>
</list>
Instructs documentation generators to emit a bulleted, numbered, or table-style list.

<para>
<para>...</para>
Instructs documentation generators to format the contents into a separate paragraph.

<include>
<include file='filename' path='tagpath[@name="id"]'>...</include>
Merges an external XML file that contains documentation. The path attribute denotes an XPath query to a specific element in that file.

User-Defined Tags
Little is special about the predefined XML tags recognized by the C# compiler, and you are free to define your own. The only special processing done by the compiler is on the <param> tag (in which it verifies the parameter name and that all the parameters on the method are documented) and the cref attribute (in which it verifies that the attribute refers to a real type or member and expands it to a fully qualified type or member ID). You can also use the cref attribute in your own tags; it is verified and expanded just as it is in the predefined <exception>, <permission>, <see>, and <seealso> tags.

Type or Member Cross-References
Type names and type or member cross-references are translated into IDs that uniquely define the type or member. These names are composed of a prefix that defines what the ID represents and a signature of the type or member. Following are the member prefixes:

XML type prefix	ID prefixes applied to…
N	Namespace
T	Type (class, struct, enum, interface, delegate)
F	Field
P	Property (includes indexers)
M	Method (includes special methods)
E	Event
!	Error
The rules describing how the signatures are generated are well documented, although fairly complex.

Here is an example of a type and the IDs that are generated:

// Namespaces do not have independent signatures
namespace NS
{
  /// T:NS.MyClass
  class MyClass
  {
    /// F:NS.MyClass.aField
    string aField;

    /// P:NS.MyClass.aProperty
    short aProperty {get {...} set {...}}

    /// T:NS.MyClass.NestedType
    class NestedType {...};

    /// M:NS.MyClass.X()
    void X() {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.Y(System.Int32,System.Double@,System.Decimal@)
    void Y(int p1, ref double p2, out decimal p3) {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.Z(System.Char[ ],System.Single[0:,0:])
    void Z(char[ ] p1, float[,] p2) {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.op_Addition(NS.MyClass,NS.MyClass)
    public static MyClass operator+(MyClass c1, MyClass c2) {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.op_Implicit(NS.MyClass)˜System.Int32
    public static implicit operator int(MyClass c) {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.#ctor
    MyClass() {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.Finalize
    ˜MyClass() {...}

    /// M:NS.MyClass.#cctor
    static MyClass() {...}
  }
}