# Nullable Value Types
Reference types can represent a nonexistent value with a null reference. Value types, however, cannot ordinarily represent null values:

string s = null;       // OK, Reference Type
int i = null;          // Compile Error, Value Type cannot be null
To represent null in a value type, you must use a special construct called a nullable type. A nullable type is denoted with a value type followed by the ? symbol:

int? i = null;                     // OK, Nullable Type
Console.WriteLine (i == null);     // True

# Nullable<T> Struct
T? translates into System.Nullable<T>, which is a lightweight immutable structure, having only two fields, to represent Value and HasValue. The essence of System​.Nul⁠lable<T> is very simple:

public struct Nullable<T> where T : struct
{
  public T Value {get;}
  public bool HasValue {get;}
  public T GetValueOrDefault();
  public T GetValueOrDefault (T defaultValue);
  ...
}
The code

int? i = null;
Console.WriteLine (i == null);              // True
translates to the following:

Nullable<int> i = new Nullable<int>();
Console.WriteLine (! i.HasValue);           // True
Attempting to retrieve Value when HasValue is false throws an InvalidOperatio⁠n​Exception. GetValueOrDefault() returns Value if HasValue is true; otherwise, it returns new T() or a specified custom default value.

The default value of T? is null.

# Implicit and Explicit Nullable Conversions
The conversion from T to T? is implicit, while the conversion from T? to T is explicit:

int? x = 5;        // implicit
int y = (int)x;    // explicit
The explicit cast is directly equivalent to calling the nullable object’s Value property. Hence, an InvalidOperationException is thrown if HasValue is false.

# Boxing and Unboxing Nullable Values
When T? is boxed, the boxed value on the heap contains T, not T?. This optimization is possible because a boxed value is a reference type that can already express null.

C# also permits the unboxing of nullable value types with the as operator. The result will be null if the cast fails:

object o = "string";
int? x = o as int?;
Console.WriteLine (x.HasValue);   // False

# Operator Lifting
The Nullable<T> struct does not define operators such as <, >, or even ==. Despite this, the following code compiles and executes correctly:

int? x = 5;
int? y = 10;
bool b = x < y;      // true
This works because the compiler borrows or “lifts” the less-than operator from the underlying value type. Semantically, it translates the preceding comparison expression into this:

bool b = (x.HasValue && y.HasValue) ? (x.Value < y.Value) : false;
In other words, if both x and y have values, it compares via int’s less-than operator; otherwise, it returns false.

Operator lifting means that you can implicitly use T’s operators on T?. You can define operators for T? in order to provide special-purpose null behavior, but in the vast majority of cases, it’s best to rely on the compiler automatically applying systematic nullable logic for you. Here are some examples:

int? x = 5;
int? y = null;

// Equality operator examples
Console.WriteLine (x == y);    // False
Console.WriteLine (x == null); // False
Console.WriteLine (x == 5);    // True
Console.WriteLine (y == null); // True
Console.WriteLine (y == 5);    // False
Console.WriteLine (y != 5);    // True

// Relational operator examples
Console.WriteLine (x < 6);     // True
Console.WriteLine (y < 6);     // False
Console.WriteLine (y > 6);     // False

// All other operator examples
Console.WriteLine (x + 5);     // 10
Console.WriteLine (x + y);     // null (prints empty line)
The compiler performs null logic differently depending on the category of operator. The following sections explain these different rules.

# Equality operators (== and !=)
Lifted equality operators handle nulls just like reference types do. This means that two null values are equal:

Console.WriteLine (       null ==        null);   // True
Console.WriteLine ((bool?)null == (bool?)null);   // True
Further:

If exactly one operand is null, the operands are unequal.

If both operands are non-null, their Values are compared.

# Relational operators (<, <=, >=, >)
The relational operators work on the principle that it is meaningless to compare null operands. This means comparing a null value to either a null or a non-null value returns false:

bool b = x < y;    // Translation:

bool b = (x.HasValue && y.HasValue) 
         ? (x.Value < y.Value)
         : false;

// b is false (assuming x is 5 and y is null)

# All other operators (+, −, *, /, %, &, |, ^, <<, >>, +, ++, --, !, ~)
These operators return null when any of the operands are null. This pattern should be familiar to SQL users:

int? c = x + y;   // Translation:

int? c = (x.HasValue && y.HasValue)
         ? (int?) (x.Value + y.Value) 
         : null;

// c is null (assuming x is 5 and y is null)
An exception is when the & and | operators are applied to bool?, which we discuss shortly.

# Mixing nullable and non-nullable operators
You can mix and match nullable and non-nullable value types (this works because there is an implicit conversion from T to T?):

int? a = null;
int b = 2;
int? c = a + b;   // c is null - equivalent to a + (int?)b


# bool? with & and | Operators
When supplied operands of type bool?, the & and | operators treat null as an unknown value. So, null | true is true because:

If the unknown value is false, the result would be true.

If the unknown value is true, the result would be true.

Similarly, null & false is false. This behavior should be familiar to SQL users. The following example enumerates other combinations:

bool? n = null;
bool? f = false;
bool? t = true;
Console.WriteLine (n | n);    // (null)
Console.WriteLine (n | f);    // (null)
Console.WriteLine (n | t);    // True
Console.WriteLine (n & n);    // (null)
Console.WriteLine (n & f);    // False
Console.WriteLine (n & t);    // (null)

# Nullable Value Types and Null Operators
Nullable value types work particularly well with the ?? operator (see “Null-Coalescing Operator”), as illustrated in this example:

int? x = null;
int y = x ?? 5;        // y is 5

int? a = null, b = 1, c = 2;
Console.WriteLine (a ?? b ?? c);  // 1 (first non-null value)
Using ?? on a nullable value type is equivalent to calling GetValueOrDefault with an explicit default value except that the expression for the default value is never evaluated if the variable is not null.

Nullable value types also work well with the null-conditional operator (see “Null-Conditional Operator”). In the following example, length evaluates to null:

System.Text.StringBuilder sb = null;
int? length = sb?.ToString().Length;
We can combine this with the null-coalescing operator to evaluate to zero instead of null:

int length = sb?.ToString().Length ?? 0;  // Evaluates to 0 if sb is null

# Scenarios for Nullable Value Types
One of the most common scenarios for nullable value types is to represent unknown values. This frequently occurs in database programming, where a class is mapped to a table with nullable columns. If these columns are strings (e.g., an EmailAddress column on a Customer table), there is no problem because string is a reference type in the CLR, which can be null. However, most other SQL column types map to CLR struct types, making nullable value types very useful when mapping SQL to the CLR:

// Maps to a Customer table in a database
public class Customer
{
  ...
  public decimal? AccountBalance;
}
A nullable type can also be used to represent the backing field of what’s sometimes called an ambient property. An ambient property, if null, returns the value of its parent:

public class Row
{
  ...
  Grid parent;
  Color? color;

  public Color Color
  {
    get { return color ?? parent.Color; }
    set { color = value == parent.Color ? (Color?)null : value; }
  }
}

# Alternatives to Nullable Value Types
Before nullable value types were part of the C# language (i.e., before C# 2.0), there were many strategies to deal with them, examples of which still appear in the .NET libraries for historical reasons. One of these strategies is to designate a particular non-null value as the “null value”; an example is in the string and array classes. String.IndexOf returns the magic value of −1 when the character is not found:

int i = "Pink".IndexOf ('b');
Console.WriteLine (i);         // −1
However, Array.IndexOf returns −1 only if the index is 0-bounded. The more general formula is that IndexOf returns one less than the lower bound of the array. In the next example, IndexOf returns 0 when an element is not found:

// Create an array whose lower bound is 1 instead of 0:

Array a = Array.CreateInstance (typeof (string),
                                new int[] {2}, new int[] {1});
a.SetValue ("a", 1);
a.SetValue ("b", 2);
Console.WriteLine (Array.IndexOf (a, "c"));  // 0
Nominating a “magic value” is problematic for several reasons:

It means that each value type has a different representation of null. In contrast, nullable value types provide one common pattern that works for all value types.

There might be no reasonable designated value. In the previous example, −1 could not always be used. The same is true for our earlier example representing an unknown account balance.

Forgetting to test for the magic value results in an incorrect value that might go unnoticed until later in execution—when it pulls an unintended magic trick. Forgetting to test HasValue on a null value, however, throws an InvalidOperationException on the spot.

The ability for a value to be null is not captured in the type. Types communicate the intention of a program, allow the compiler to check for correctness, and enable a consistent set of rules enforced by the compiler.

# Nullable Reference Types
Whereas nullable value types bring nullability to value types, nullable reference types (C# 8+) do the opposite. When enabled, they bring (a degree of) non-nullability to reference types, with the purpose of helping to avoid NullReferenceExceptions.

Nullable reference types introduce a level of safety that’s enforced purely by the compiler, in the form of warnings when it detects code that’s at risk of generating a NullReferenceException.

To enable nullable reference types, you must either add the Nullable element to your .csproj project file (if you want to enable it for the entire project):

<PropertyGroup>
  <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
</PropertyGroup>
or/and use the following directives in your code, in the places where it should take effect:

#nullable enable   // enables nullable reference types from this point on
#nullable disable  // disables nullable reference types from this point on
#nullable restore  // resets nullable reference types to project setting
After being enabled, the compiler makes non-nullability the default: if you want a reference type to accept nulls without the compiler generating a warning, you must apply the ? suffix to indicate a nullable reference type. In the following example, s1 is non-nullable, whereas s2 is nullable:

#nullable enable    // Enable nullable reference types

string s1 = null;   // Generates a compiler warning!
string? s2 = null;  // OK: s2 is nullable reference type

NOTE
Because nullable reference types are compile-time constructs, there’s no runtime difference between string and string?. In contrast, nullable value types introduce something concrete into the type system, namely the Nullable<T> struct.

The following also generates a warning because x is not initialized:

class Foo { string x; }
The warning disappears if you initialize x, either via a field initializer or via code in the constructor.

# The Null-Forgiving Operator
The compiler also warns you upon dereferencing a nullable reference type, if it thinks a NullReferenceException might occur. In the following example, accessing the string’s Length property generates a warning:

void Foo (string? s) => Console.Write (s.Length);
You can remove the warning with the null-forgiving operator (!):

void Foo (string? s) => Console.Write (s!.Length);
Our use of the null-forgiving operator in this example is dangerous in that we could end up throwing the very NullReferenceException we were trying to avoid in the first place. We could fix it as follows:

void Foo (string? s)
{
  if (s != null) Console.Write (s.Length);
}
Notice now that we don’t need the null-forgiving operator. This is because the compiler performs static flow analysis and is smart enough to infer—at least in simple cases—when a dereference is safe and there’s no chance of a NullReferen⁠ce​Exception.

The compiler’s ability to detect and warn is not bulletproof, and there are also limits to what’s possible in terms of coverage. For instance, it’s unable to know whether an array’s elements have been populated, and so the following does not generate a warning:

var strings = new string[10];
Console.WriteLine (strings[0].Length);

# Separating the Annotation and Warning Contexts
Enabling nullable reference types via the #nullable enable directive (or the <Nullable>enable</Nullable> project setting) does two things:

It enables the nullable annotation context, which tells the compiler to treat all reference-type variable declarations as non-nullable unless suffixed by the ? symbol.

It enables the nullable warning context, which tells the compiler to generate warnings upon encountering code at risk of throwing a NullReference​Excep⁠tion.

It can sometimes be useful to separate these two concepts and enable just the annotation context, or (less usefully) just the warning context:

#nullable enable annotations    // Enable the annotation context
// OR:
#nullable enable warnings       // Enable the warning context
(The same trick works with #nullable disable and #nullable restore.)

You can also do it via the project file:

<Nullable>annotations</Nullable>
<!-- OR -->
<Nullable>warnings</Nullable>
Enabling just the annotation context for a particular class or assembly can be a good first step in introducing nullable reference types into a legacy codebase. By correctly annotating public members, your class or assembly can act as a “good citizen” to other classes or assemblies—so that they can benefit fully from nullable reference types—without having to deal with warnings in your own class or assembly.

# Treating Nullable Warnings as Errors
In greenfield projects, it makes sense to fully enable the nullable context from the outset. You might want to take the additional step of treating nullable warnings as errors so that your project cannot compile until all null warnings have been resolved:

<PropertyGroup>
  <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  <WarningsAsErrors>CS8600;CS8602;CS8603</WarningsAsErrors>
</PropertyGroup>