# Building Query Expressions
So far in this chapter, when we’ve needed to dynamically compose queries, we’ve done so by conditionally chaining query operators. Although this is adequate in many scenarios, sometimes you need to work at a more granular level and dynamically compose the lambda expressions that feed the operators.

# Delegates Versus Expression Trees
Recall that:
  - Local queries, which use `Enumerable` operators, take delegates.
  - Interpreted queries, which use `Queryable` operators, take expression trees.

We can see this by comparing the signature of the Where operator in Enumerable and Queryable:
```c#
public static IEnumerable<TSource> Where<TSource> (this
  IEnumerable<TSource> source, Func<TSource,bool> predicate)

public static IQueryable<TSource> Where<TSource> (this
  IQueryable<TSource> source, Expression<Func<TSource,bool>> predicate)
```
When embedded within a query, a lambda expression looks identical whether it binds to Enumerable’s operators or Queryable’s operators:
```c#
IEnumerable<Product> q1 = localProducts.Where (p => !p.Discontinued);
IQueryable<Product>  q2 = sqlProducts.Where   (p => !p.Discontinued);
```
When you assign a lambda expression to an intermediate variable, however, you must be explicit about whether to resolve to a delegate (i.e., Func<>) or an expression tree (i.e., Expression<Func<>>). In the following example, predicate1 and predicate2 are not interchangeable:
```c#
Func <Product, bool> predicate1 = p => !p.Discontinued;
IEnumerable<Product> q1 = localProducts.Where (predicate1);

Expression <Func <Product, bool>> predicate2 = p => !p.Discontinued;
IQueryable<Product> q2 = sqlProducts.Where (predicate2);
```
# Compiling expression trees
You can convert an expression tree to a delegate by calling Compile. This is of particular value when writing methods that return reusable expressions. To illustrate, let’s add a static method to the Product class that returns a predicate evaluating to true if a product is not discontinued and has sold in the past 30 days:
```c#
public class Product
{
  public static Expression<Func<Product, bool>> IsSelling()
  {
    return p => !p.Discontinued && p.LastSale > DateTime.Now.AddDays (-30);
  }
}
The method just written can be used both in interpreted and local queries, as follows:

void Test()
{
  var dbContext = new NutshellContext();
  Product[] localProducts = dbContext.Products.ToArray();

  IQueryable<Product> sqlQuery =
    dbContext.Products.Where (Product.IsSelling());

  IEnumerable<Product> localQuery =
    localProducts.Where (Product.IsSelling().Compile());
}
```
`Note`: .NET does not provide an API to convert in the reverse direction, from a delegate to an expression tree. This makes expression trees more versatile.
# The AsQueryable
`AsQueryable` operator lets you write whole queries that can run over either local or remote sequences:
```c#
IQueryable<Product> FilterSortProducts (IQueryable<Product> input)
{
  return from p in input
         where ...
         orderby ...
         select p;
}

void Test()
{
  var dbContext = new NutshellContext();
  Product[] localProducts = dbContext.Products.ToArray();

  var sqlQuery   = FilterSortProducts (dbContext.Products);
  var localQuery = FilterSortProducts (localProducts.AsQueryable());
  ...
}
```
AsQueryable wraps IQueryable<T> clothing around a local sequence so that subsequent query operators resolve to expression trees. When you later enumerate over the result, the expression trees are implicitly compiled (at a small performance cost), and the local sequence enumerates as it would ordinarily.

# Expression Trees
We said previously that an implicit conversion from a lambda expression to Expression<TDelegate> causes the C# compiler to emit code that builds an expression tree. With some programming effort, you can do the same thing manually at runtime—in other words, dynamically build an expression tree from scratch. The result can be cast to an Expression<TDelegate> and used in EF Core queries or compiled into an ordinary delegate by calling Compile.

# The Expression DOM
An expression tree is a miniature code DOM. Each node in the tree is represented by a type in the System.Linq.Expressions namespace
https://learning.oreilly.com/api/v2/epubs/urn:orm:book:9781098121945/files/assets/cn10_0810.png

The base class for all nodes is the (nongeneric) Expression class. The generic Expression<TDelegate> class actually means “typed lambda expression” and might have been named LambdaExpression<TDelegate> if it wasn’t for the clumsiness of this:

LambdaExpression<Func<Customer,bool>> f = ...
Expression<T>’s base type is the (nongeneric) LambdaExpression class. Lamdba​Ex⁠pression provides type unification for lambda expression trees: any typed Expression<T> can be cast to a LambdaExpression.

The thing that distinguishes LambdaExpressions from ordinary Expressions is that lambda expressions have parameters.

To create an expression tree, don’t instantiate node types directly; rather, call static methods provided on the Expression class, such as Add, And, Call, Constant, LessThan, and so on.
```c#
Expression<Func<string, bool>> f = s => s.Length < 5;
```
https://learning.oreilly.com/api/v2/epubs/urn:orm:book:9781098121945/files/assets/cn10_0811.png

We can demonstrate this as follows:
```c#
Console.WriteLine (f.Body.NodeType);                     // LessThan
Console.WriteLine (((BinaryExpression) f.Body).Right);   // 5
```
Let’s now build this expression from scratch. The principle is that you start from the bottom of the tree and work your way up. The bottommost thing in our tree is a ParameterExpression, the lambda expression parameter called “s” of type string:

ParameterExpression p = Expression.Parameter (typeof (string), "s");

The next step is to build the MemberExpression and ConstantExpression. In the former case, we need to access the Length property of our parameter, “s”:

MemberExpression stringLength = Expression.Property (p, "Length");
ConstantExpression five = Expression.Constant (5);
Next is the LessThan comparison:

BinaryExpression comparison = Expression.LessThan (stringLength, five);
The final step is to construct the lambda expression, which links an expression Body to a collection of parameters:

Expression<Func<string, bool>> lambda
  = Expression.Lambda<Func<string, bool>> (comparison, p);

A convenient way to test our lambda is by compiling it to a delegate:

Func<string, bool> runnable = lambda.Compile();

Console.WriteLine (runnable ("kangaroo"));           // False
Console.WriteLine (runnable ("dog"));                // True
