# Change Tracking
When you change a property value in an entity loaded via `DbContext`, EF Core recognizes the change and updates the database accordingly upon calling SaveChanges. To do that, `it creates a snapshot of the state of entities loaded through your DbContext subclass and compares the current state to the original one when SaveChanges is called (or when you manually query change tracking, as you’ll see in a moment)`. You can enumerate the tracked changes in a DbContext as follows:

```c#
foreach (var e in dbContext.ChangeTracker.Entries())
{
  Console.WriteLine ($"{e.Entity.GetType().FullName} is {e.State}");
  foreach (var m in e.Members)
    Console.WriteLine (
      $"  {m.Metadata.Name}: '{m.CurrentValue}' modified: {m.IsModified}");
}
```
When you call `SaveChanges`, EF Core uses the information in the `ChangeTracker` to construct SQL statements that will update the database to match the changes in your objects, issuing insert statements to add new rows, update statements to modify data, and delete statements to remove rows that were removed from the object graph in your `DbContext` subclass. Any `TransactionScope` is honored; if none is present, it wraps all statements in a new transaction.

You can `optimize change tracking by implementing INotifyPropertyChanged and, optionally, INotifyPropertyChanging in your entities`. The former allows EF Core to avoid the overhead of comparing modified with original entities; the latter allows EF Core to avoid storing the original values altogether. After implementing these interfaces, call the `HasChangeTrackingStrategy` method on the ModelBuilder when configuring the model in order to activate the optimized change tracking.
  - When you make changes to an entity that is being tracked by EF Core, it needs to keep track of the original values of the entity so that it can detect changes and generate appropriate SQL statements when saving changes back to the database. This process can be expensive, especially when dealing with large data sets.
  - To optimize change tracking, you can implement the INotifyPropertyChanged and INotifyPropertyChanging interfaces in your entity classes. These interfaces allow EF Core to avoid the overhead of comparing modified with original entities, which can significantly improve performance.
  - The `INotifyPropertyChanged` interface allows you to notify EF Core when a property on your entity has changed. When EF Core receives this notification, it knows that the entity has been modified and can generate appropriate SQL statements when saving changes to the database.
  - The INotifyPropertyChanging interface allows you to notify EF Core when a property on your entity is about to change. When EF Core receives this notification, it can avoid storing the original values of the entity altogether, which can further improve performance.
  - After implementing these interfaces in your entity classes, you can activate the optimized change tracking by calling the HasChangeTrackingStrategy method on the ModelBuilder when configuring the model. This method takes a ChangeTrackingStrategy enumeration value, which specifies how EF Core should track changes for entities of that type. You can set this value to ChangeTrackingStrategy.ChangingAndChangedNotifications to activate the optimized change tracking.
  - Overall, implementing `INotifyPropertyChanged` and INotifyPropertyChanging interfaces can significantly improve the performance of change tracking in EF Core, especially when dealing with large data sets.

```c#
using System.ComponentModel;

public class Customer : INotifyPropertyChanged, INotifyPropertyChanging
{
    private int _customerId;
    private string _name;

    public int CustomerId
    {
        get { return _customerId; }
        set { _customerId = value; OnPropertyChanged(nameof(CustomerId)); }
    }

    public string Name
    {
        get { return _name; }
        set { OnPropertyChanging(nameof(Name)); _name = value; OnPropertyChanged(nameof(Name)); }
    }

    public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
    public event PropertyChangingEventHandler PropertyChanging;

    protected void OnPropertyChanged(string propertyName)
    {
        PropertyChanged?.Invoke(this, new PropertyChangedEventArgs(propertyName));
    }

    protected void OnPropertyChanging(string propertyName)
    {
        PropertyChanging?.Invoke(this, new PropertyChangingEventArgs(propertyName));
    }
}

```
In this example, the Customer class implements both the `INotifyPropertyChanged` and `INotifyPropertyChanging` interfaces. The Name property raises the PropertyChanging event before the value is changed, which allows EF Core to avoid storing the original value of the property. The OnPropertyChanged method raises the PropertyChanged event after the value is changed, which notifies any listeners that the property has changed.

By implementing these interfaces and raising the appropriate events, EF Core can optimize change tracking and improve performance when working with large datasets or frequently changing entities.
# so that means  EF Core will not store the state of this entity until OnPropertyChanging event is triggered??
Yes, that's correct. When the OnPropertyChanging event is triggered, EF Core will know that a property on the entity is about to change and will avoid storing the original values of the entity altogether. This can improve performance by reducing the amount of data that needs to be tracked and stored by EF Core.