# Closing and Disposing Stream Adapters
You have four choices in tearing down stream adapters:
1. Close the adapter only.
2. Close the adapter and then close the stream.
3. (For writers) Flush the adapter and then close the stream. 4. (For readers) Close just the stream.

Close and Dispose are synonymous with adapters, just as they are with streams.

`Options 1 and 2 `are semantically identical because closing an adapter automatically closes the underlying stream. Whenever you nest using statements, you’re implicitly taking option 2:
```c#
    using (FileStream fs = File.Create ("test.txt"))
    using (TextWriter writer = new StreamWriter (fs))
writer.WriteLine ("Line");
```

Because the nest disposes from the inside out, the adapter is closed first, and then the stream. Furthermore, if an exception is thrown within the adapter’s constructor, the stream still closes. It’s hard to go wrong with nested using statements!
`Never close a stream before closing or flushing its writer`— you’ll amputate any data that’s buffered in the adapter.

Options 3 and 4 work because adapters are in the unusual category of optionally disposable objects. An example of when you might choose not to dispose an adapter is when you’ve finished with the adapter but you want to leave the underlying stream open for subsequent use:
```c#
using (FileStream fs = new FileStream ("test.txt", FileMode.Create))
    {
StreamWriter writer = new StreamWriter (fs); writer.WriteLine ("Hello");
writer.Flush();
fs.Position = 0;
  Console.WriteLine (fs.ReadByte());
    }

```
Stream adapters—with their optional disposal semantics—do not implement the extended disposal pattern where the final‐ izer calls Dispose. This allows an abandoned adapter to evade automatic disposal when the garbage collector catches up with it.

There’s also a constructor on StreamReader/StreamWriter that instructs it to keep the stream open after disposal. Consequently, we can rewrite the preceding example as follows:

```c#

    using (var fs = new FileStream ("test.txt", FileMode.Create))
    {
using (var writer = new StreamWriter (fs, new UTF8Encoding (false, true), 0x400, true))
        writer.WriteLine ("Hello");
      fs.Position = 0;
      Console.WriteLine (fs.ReadByte());
      Console.WriteLine (fs.Length);
}

```