# Memory-Mapped Files
Memory-mapped files provide two key features:
• Efficient random access to file data
• The ability to share memory between different processes on the same computer
The types for memory-mapped files reside in the System.IO.MemoryMappedFiles namespace. Internally, they work by wrapping the operating system’s API for memory-mapped files.
# Memory-Mapped Files and Random File I/O
Although an ordinary FileStream allows random file I/O (by setting the stream’s Position property), it’s optimized for sequential I/O. As a rough rule of thumb:
• FileStreams are approximately 10 times faster than memory-mapped files for sequential I/O.
• Memory-mapped files are approximately 10 times faster than FileStreams for random I/O.

Changing a FileStream’s Position can cost several microseconds—which adds up if done within a loop. A FileStream is also unsuitable for multithreaded access— because its position changes as it is read or written.
To create a memory-mapped file:
1. Obtain a FileStream as you would ordinarily.
2. Instantiate a MemoryMappedFile, passing in the file stream.
3. Call CreateViewAccessor on the memory-mapped file object.


The following creates a one million–byte file and then uses the memory-mapped file API to read and then write a byte at position 500,000:
    File.WriteAllBytes ("long.bin", new byte [1000000]);
    using MemoryMappedFile mmf = MemoryMappedFile.CreateFromFile ("long.bin");
    using MemoryMappedViewAccessor accessor = mmf.CreateViewAccessor();
    accessor.Write (500000, (byte) 77);
    Console.WriteLine (accessor.ReadByte (500000));   // 77
You can also specify a map name and capacity when calling CreateFromFile. Specifying a non-null map name allows the memory block to be shared with other processes (see the following section); specifying a capacity automatically enlarges the file to that value. The following creates a 1,000-byte file:
    File.WriteAllBytes ("short.bin", new byte [1]);
    using (var mmf = MemoryMappedFile.CreateFromFile
("short.bin", FileMode.Create, null, 1000))

# Memory-Mapped Files and Shared Memory (Windows)
Under Windows, you can also use memory-mapped files as a means of sharing memory between processes on the same computer. One process creates a shared memory block by calling MemoryMappedFile.CreateNew, and then other processes
subscribe to that same memory block by calling MemoryMappedFile.OpenExisting with the same name. Although it’s still referred to as a memory-mapped “file,” it resides entirely in memory and has no disk presence.
The following code creates a 500-byte shared memory-mapped file and writes the integer 12345 at position 0:
    using (MemoryMappedFile mmFile = MemoryMappedFile.CreateNew ("Demo", 500))
    using (MemoryMappedViewAccessor accessor = mmFile.CreateViewAccessor())
    {
accessor.Write (0, 12345);
      Console.ReadLine();   // Keep shared memory alive until user hits Enter.
    }
The following code opens that memory-mapped file and reads that integer:
    // This can run in a separate executable:
    using (MemoryMappedFile mmFile = MemoryMappedFile.OpenExisting ("Demo"))
    using (MemoryMappedViewAccessor accessor = mmFile.CreateViewAccessor())
      Console.WriteLine (accessor.ReadInt32 (0));   // 12345