# dotnet-counters
The dotnet-counters tool monitors the memory and CPU usage of a .NET process and writes the data to the console (or a file).
To install the tool, run the following from a command prompt or terminal with dotnet in the path:
    dotnet tool install --global dotnet-counters
You can then start monitoring a process, as follows:
dotnet-counters monitor System.Runtime --process-id <<ProcessID>>
System.Runtime means that we want to monitor all counters under the System.Run‐ time category. You can specify either a category or counter name (the dotnet- counters list command lists all available categories and counters).

The output is continually refreshed and looks like this:
```c#
    Press p to pause, r to resume, q to quit.
        Status: Running
    [System.Runtime]
        # of Assemblies Loaded                            63
        % Time in GC (since last GC)                       0
        Allocation Rate (Bytes / sec)                244,864
        CPU Usage (%)                                      6
        Exceptions / sec                                   0
        GC Heap Size (MB)                                  8
        Gen 0 GC / sec                                     0
        Gen 0 Size (B)                               265,176
        Gen 1 GC / sec                                     0
        Gen 1 Size (B)                               451,552
        Gen 2 GC / sec                                     0
        Gen 2 Size (B)                                    24
        LOH Size (B)                               3,200,296
        Monitor Lock Contention Count / sec
        Number of Active Timers
        ThreadPool Completed Work Items / sec
        ThreadPool Queue Length
        ThreadPool Threads Count
        Working Set (MB)
```
Here are all available commands:
list: Displays a list of counter names along with a description of each
ps: Displays a list of dotnet processes eligible for monitoring
monitor: Displays values of selected counters (periodically refreshed)
collect: Saves counter information to a file

The following parameters are supported:
Options/arguments
--version
-h, --help
-p, --process-id
--refresh-interval
-o, --output --format
Purpose
Displays the version of dotnet-counters. Displays help about the program.
ID of dotnet process to monitor. Applies to themonitorandcollect commands.
Sets the desired refresh interval in seconds. Applies to themonitorand collect commands.
Sets the output file name. Applies to the collect command.
Sets the output format. Valid are csv or json. Applies to the collect command.