# dotnet-trace
Traces are timestamped records of events in your program, such as a method being called or a database being queried. Traces can also include performance metrics and custom events, and can contain local context such as the value of local variables. Traditionally, .NET Framework and frameworks such as ASP.NET used ETW. In .NET 5, application traces are written to ETW when running on Windows and LTTng on Linux.
To install the tool, run the following command:
```c#
    dotnet tool install --global dotnet-trace
```
To start recording a program’s events, run the following command:
dotnet-trace collect --process-id <<ProcessId>>
This runs dotnet-trace with the default profile, which collects CPU and .NET run‐ time events and writes to a file called trace.nettrace. You can specify other profiles with the --profile switch: gc-verbose tracks garbage collection and sampled object allocation, and gc-collect tracks garbage collection with a low overhead. The -o switch lets you specify a different output filename.

The default output is a .netperf file, which can be analyzed directly on a Windows machine with the PerfView tool. Alternatively, you can instruct dotnet-trace to create a file compatible with Speedscope, which is a free online analysis service at https://speedscope.app. To create a Speedscope (.speedscope.json) file, use the option --format speedscope.

You can download the latest version of PerfView from https:// github.com/microsoft/perfview. The version that ships with Windows 10 might not support .netperf files.
The following commands are supported:
 
Commands
collect
ps list-profiles convert <file>
Purpose
Starts recording counter information to a file.
Displays a list of dotnet processes eligible for monitoring.
Lists prebuilt tracing profiles with a description of providers and filters in each.
Converts from the nettrace (.netperf) format to an alternative format. Currently, speedscope is the only target option.

# Custom trace events
Your app can emit custom events by defining a custom EventSource:
[EventSource (Name = "MyTestSource")]
public sealed class MyEventSource : EventSource {
      public static MyEventSource Instance = new MyEventSource ();

  MyEventSource() : base (EventSourceSettings.EtwSelfDescribingEventFormat)
      {
      }
      public void Log (string message, int someNumber)
      {
        WriteEvent (1, message, someNumber);
      }
}

The WriteEvent method is overloaded to accept various combinations of simple
types (primarily strings and integers). You can then call it as follows:
    MyEventSource.Instance.Log ("Something", 123);
When calling dotnet-trace, you must specify the name(s) of any custom event sources that want to record:
dotnet-trace collect --process-id <<ProcessId>> --providers MyTestSource