# XmlWriter
XmlWriter is a forward-only writer of an XML stream. The design of XmlWriter is symmetrical to XmlReader.

As with XmlTextReader, you construct an XmlWriter by calling Create with an optional settings object. In the following example, we enable indenting to make the output more human-readable and then write a simple XML file:

XmlWriterSettings settings = new XmlWriterSettings();
settings.Indent = true;

using XmlWriter writer = XmlWriter.Create ("foo.xml", settings);

writer.WriteStartElement ("customer");
writer.WriteElementString ("firstname", "Jim");
writer.WriteElementString ("lastname", "Bo");
writer.WriteEndElement();
This produces the following document (the same as the file we read in the first example of XmlReader):

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<customer>
  <firstname>Jim</firstname>
  <lastname>Bo</lastname>
</customer>
XmlWriter automatically writes the declaration at the top unless you indicate otherwise in XmlWriterSettings by setting OmitXmlDeclaration to true or ConformanceLevel to Fragment. The latter also permits writing multiple root nodes—something that otherwise throws an exception.

The WriteValue method writes a single text node. It accepts both string and nonstring types such as bool and DateTime, internally calling XmlConvert to perform XML-compliant string conversions:

writer.WriteStartElement ("birthdate");
writer.WriteValue (DateTime.Now);
writer.WriteEndElement();
In contrast, if we call

WriteElementString ("birthdate", DateTime.Now.ToString());
the result would be both non-XML-compliant and vulnerable to incorrect parsing.

WriteString is equivalent to calling WriteValue with a string. XmlWriter automatically escapes characters that would otherwise be illegal within an attribute or element, such as &, < >, and extended Unicode characters.

Writing Attributes
You can write attributes immediately after writing a start element:

writer.WriteStartElement ("customer");
writer.WriteAttributeString ("id", "1");
writer.WriteAttributeString ("status", "archived");
To write nonstring values, call WriteStartAttribute, WriteValue, and then WriteEndAttribute.

Writing Other Node Types
XmlWriter also defines the following methods for writing other kinds of nodes:

WriteBase64       // for binary data
WriteBinHex       // for binary data
WriteCData
WriteComment
WriteDocType
WriteEntityRef
WriteProcessingInstruction
WriteRaw
WriteWhitespace
WriteRaw directly injects a string into the output stream. There is also a WriteNode method that accepts an XmlReader, echoing everything from the given XmlReader.

Namespaces and Prefixes
The overloads for the Write* methods allow you to associate an element or attribute with a namespace. Let’s rewrite the contents of the XML file in our previous example. This time we will associate all of the elements with the http://oreilly.com namespace, declaring the prefix o at the customer element:

writer.WriteStartElement ("o", "customer", "http://oreilly.com");
writer.WriteElementString ("o", "firstname", "http://oreilly.com", "Jim");
writer.WriteElementString ("o", "lastname", "http://oreilly.com", "Bo");
writer.WriteEndElement();
The output is now as follows:

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<o:customer xmlns:o='http://oreilly.com'>
  <o:firstname>Jim</o:firstname>
  <o:lastname>Bo</o:lastname>
</o:customer>
Notice how for brevity XmlWriter omits the child element’s namespace declarations when they are already declared by the parent element.

Patterns for Using XmlReader/XmlWriter
Working with Hierarchical Data
Consider the following classes:

public class Contacts
{
  public IList<Customer> Customers = new List<Customer>();
  public IList<Supplier> Suppliers = new List<Supplier>();
}

public class Customer { public string FirstName, LastName; }
public class Supplier { public string Name;                }
Suppose that you want to use XmlReader and XmlWriter to serialize a Contacts object to XML, as in the following:

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<contacts>
   <customer id="1">
      <firstname>Jay</firstname>
      <lastname>Dee</lastname>
   </customer>
   <customer>                     <!-- we'll assume id is optional -->
      <firstname>Kay</firstname>
      <lastname>Gee</lastname>
   </customer>
   <supplier>
      <name>X Technologies Ltd</name>
   </supplier>
</contacts>
The best approach is not to write one big method, but to encapsulate XML functionality in the Customer and Supplier types themselves by writing ReadXml and WriteXml methods on these types. The pattern for doing so is straightforward:

ReadXml and WriteXml leave the reader/writer at the same depth when they exit.

ReadXml reads the outer element, whereas WriteXml writes only its inner content.

Here’s how we would write the Customer type:

public class Customer
{
  public const string XmlName = "customer";
  public int? ID;
  public string FirstName, LastName;

  public Customer () { }
  public Customer (XmlReader r) { ReadXml (r); }

  public void ReadXml (XmlReader r)
  {
    if (r.MoveToAttribute ("id")) ID = r.ReadContentAsInt();
    r.ReadStartElement();
    FirstName = r.ReadElementContentAsString ("firstname", "");
    LastName = r.ReadElementContentAsString ("lastname", "");
    r.ReadEndElement();
  }

  public void WriteXml (XmlWriter w)
  {
    if (ID.HasValue) w.WriteAttributeString ("id", "", ID.ToString());
    w.WriteElementString ("firstname", FirstName);
    w.WriteElementString ("lastname", LastName);
  }
}
Notice that ReadXml reads the outer start and end element nodes. If its caller did this job instead, Customer couldn’t read its own attributes. The reason for not making WriteXml symmetrical in this regard is twofold:

The caller might need to choose how the outer element is named.

The caller might need to write extra XML attributes, such as the element’s subtype (which could then be used to decide which class to instantiate when reading back the element).

Another benefit of following this pattern is that it makes your implementation compatible with IXmlSerializable (we cover this in “Serialization” in the online supplement at http://www.albahari.com/nutshell).

The Supplier class is analogous:

public class Supplier
{
  public const string XmlName = "supplier";
  public string Name;

  public Supplier () { }
  public Supplier (XmlReader r) { ReadXml (r); }

  public void ReadXml (XmlReader r)
  {
    r.ReadStartElement();
    Name = r.ReadElementContentAsString ("name", "");
    r.ReadEndElement();
  }

  public void WriteXml (XmlWriter w) =>
    w.WriteElementString ("name", Name);
}
With the Contacts class, we must enumerate the customers element in ReadXml, checking whether each subelement is a customer or a supplier. We also need to code around the empty element trap:

public void ReadXml (XmlReader r)
{
  bool isEmpty = r.IsEmptyElement;           // This ensures we don't get
  r.ReadStartElement();                      // snookered by an empty
  if (isEmpty) return;                       // <contacts/> element!
  while (r.NodeType == XmlNodeType.Element)
  {
    if (r.Name == Customer.XmlName)      Customers.Add (new Customer (r));
    else if (r.Name == Supplier.XmlName) Suppliers.Add (new Supplier (r));
    else
      throw new XmlException ("Unexpected node: " + r.Name);
  }
  r.ReadEndElement();
}

public void WriteXml (XmlWriter w)
{
  foreach (Customer c in Customers)
  {
    w.WriteStartElement (Customer.XmlName);
    c.WriteXml (w);
    w.WriteEndElement();
  }
  foreach (Supplier s in Suppliers)
  {
    w.WriteStartElement (Supplier.XmlName);
    s.WriteXml (w);
    w.WriteEndElement();
  }
}
Here’s how to serialize a Contacts object populated with Customers and Suppliers to an XML file:

var settings = new XmlWriterSettings();
settings.Indent = true;  // To make visual inspection easier

using XmlWriter writer = XmlWriter.Create ("contacts.xml", settings);

var cts = new Contacts()
// Add Customers and Suppliers...

writer.WriteStartElement ("contacts");
cts.WriteXml (writer);
writer.WriteEndElement();
Here’s how to deserialize from the same file:

var settings = new XmlReaderSettings();
settings.IgnoreWhitespace = true;
settings.IgnoreComments = true;
settings.IgnoreProcessingInstructions = true;

using XmlReader reader = XmlReader.Create("contacts.xml", settings);
reader.MoveToContent();
var cts = new Contacts();
cts.ReadXml(reader);
Mixing XmlReader/XmlWriter with an X-DOM
You can fly in an X-DOM at any point in the XML tree where XmlReader or XmlWriter becomes too cumbersome. Using the X-DOM to handle inner elements is an excellent way to combine X-DOM’s ease of use with the low-memory footprint of XmlReader and XmlWriter.

Using XmlReader with XElement
To read the current element into an X-DOM, you call XNode.ReadFrom, passing in the XmlReader. Unlike XElement.Load, this method is not “greedy” in that it doesn’t expect to see a whole document. Instead, it reads just the end of the current subtree.

For instance, suppose that we have an XML logfile structured as follows:

<log>
  <logentry id="1">
    <date>...</date>
    <source>...</source>
    ...
  </logentry>
  ...
</log>
If there were a million logentry elements, reading the entire thing into an X-DOM would waste memory. A better solution is to traverse each logentry with an XmlReader and then use XElement to process the elements individually:

XmlReaderSettings settings = new XmlReaderSettings();
settings.IgnoreWhitespace = true;

using XmlReader r = XmlReader.Create ("logfile.xml", settings);

r.ReadStartElement ("log");
while (r.Name == "logentry")
{
  XElement logEntry = (XElement) XNode.ReadFrom (r);
  int id = (int) logEntry.Attribute ("id");
  DateTime date = (DateTime) logEntry.Element ("date");
  string source = (string) logEntry.Element ("source");
  ...
}
r.ReadEndElement();
If you follow the pattern described in the previous section, you can slot an XElement into a custom type’s ReadXml or WriteXml method without the caller ever knowing you’ve cheated! For instance, we could rewrite Customer’s ReadXml method, as follows:

public void ReadXml (XmlReader r)
{
  XElement x = (XElement) XNode.ReadFrom (r);
  ID = (int) x.Attribute ("id");
  FirstName = (string) x.Element ("firstname");
  LastName = (string) x.Element ("lastname");
}
XElement collaborates with XmlReader to ensure that namespaces are kept intact, and prefixes are properly expanded—even if defined at an outer level. So, if our XML file reads like this:

<log xmlns="http://loggingspace">
  <logentry id="1">
  ...
the XElements we constructed at the logentry level would correctly inherit the outer namespace.

Using XmlWriter with XElement
You can use an XElement just to write inner elements to an XmlWriter. The following code writes a million logentry elements to an XML file using XElement—without storing the entire thing in memory:

using XmlWriter w = XmlWriter.Create ("logfile.xml");

w.WriteStartElement ("log");
for (int i = 0; i < 1000000; i++)
{
  XElement e = new XElement ("logentry",
                 new XAttribute ("id", i),
                 new XElement ("date", DateTime.Today.AddDays (-1)),
                 new XElement ("source", "test"));
  e.WriteTo (w);
}
w.WriteEndElement ();
Using an XElement incurs minimal execution overhead. If we amend this example to use XmlWriter throughout, there’s no measurable difference in execution time.