# Collections
.NET provides a standard set of types for storing and managing collections of objects. These include resizable lists, linked lists, sorted and unsorted dictionaries, and arrays. Of these, only arrays form part of the C# language; the remaining collections are just classes you instantiate like any other.

We can divide the types in the .NET BCL for collections into the following categories:
  - Interfaces that define standard collection protocols
   - Ready-to-use collection classes (lists, dictionaries, etc.)
   - Base classes for writing application-specific collections

The collection namespaces are as follows:

Namespace	Contains
`System.Collections`	Nongeneric collection classes and interfaces
`System.Collections.Specialized`	Strongly typed nongeneric collection classes
`System.Collections.Generic`	Generic collection classes and interfaces
`System.Collections.ObjectModel`	Proxies and bases for custom collections
`System.Collections.Concurrent`	Thread-safe collections (see Chapter 22)

# Enumeration
In computing, there are many different kinds of collections, ranging from simple data structures, such as arrays or linked lists, to more complex ones, such as red/black trees and hashtables. Although the internal implementation and external characteristics of these data structures vary widely, the ability to traverse the contents of the collection is an almost universal need. The .NET BCL supports this need via a pair of interfaces (IEnumerable and IEnumerator, and their generic counterparts) that allow different data structures to expose a common traversal API.

```
Idictionary/IList -> Icollection -> IEnumerable -> IEnumerator
Idictionary/IList<T> -> Icollection<T> -> IEnumerable<T> -> IEnumerator<T>
```

# IEnumerable and IEnumerator
The IEnumerator interface defines the basic low-level protocol by which elements in a collection are traversed—or enumerated—in a forward-only manner. Its declaration is as follows:

public interface IEnumerator
{
  bool MoveNext();
  object Current { get; }
  void Reset();
}
MoveNext advances the current element or “cursor” to the next position, returning false if there are no more elements in the collection. Current returns the element at the current position (usually cast from object to a more specific type). MoveNext must be called before retrieving the first element—this is to allow for an empty collection. The Reset method, if implemented, moves back to the start, allowing the collection to be enumerated again. Reset exists mainly for Component Object Model (COM) interoperability; calling it directly is generally avoided because it’s not universally supported (and is unnecessary in that it’s usually just as easy to instantiate a new enumerator).

Collections do not usually implement enumerators; instead, they provide enumerators, via the interface IEnumerable:

public interface IEnumerable
{
  IEnumerator GetEnumerator();
}
By defining a single method retuning an enumerator, IEnumerable provides flexibility in that the iteration logic can be farmed out to another class. Moreover, it means that several consumers can enumerate the collection at once without interfering with one another. You can think of IEnumerable as “IEnumeratorProvider,” and it is the most basic interface that collection classes implement.

The following example illustrates low-level use of IEnumerable and IEnumerator:

string s = "Hello";

// Because string implements IEnumerable, we can call GetEnumerator():
IEnumerator rator = s.GetEnumerator();

while (rator.MoveNext())
{
  char c = (char) rator.Current;
  Console.Write (c + ".");
}

// Output:  H.e.l.l.o.
However, it’s rare to call methods on enumerators directly in this manner because C# provides a syntactic shortcut: the foreach statement. Here’s the same example rewritten using foreach:

string s = "Hello";      // The String class implements IEnumerable

foreach (char c in s)
  Console.Write (c + ".");

# IEnumerable<T> and IEnumerator<T>
IEnumerator and IEnumerable are nearly always implemented in conjunction with their extended generic versions:

public interface IEnumerator<T> : IEnumerator, IDisposable
{
  T Current { get; }
}

public interface IEnumerable<T> : IEnumerable
{
  IEnumerator<T> GetEnumerator();
}
By defining a typed version of Current and GetEnumerator, these interfaces strengthen static type safety, avoid the overhead of boxing with value-type elements, and are more convenient to the consumer. Arrays automatically implement IEnumerable<T> (where T is the member type of the array).

Thanks to the improved static type safety, calling the following method with an array of characters will generate a compile-time error:

void Test (IEnumerable<int> numbers) { ... }
It’s a standard practice for collection classes to publicly expose IEnumerable<T> while “hiding” the nongeneric IEnumerable through explicit interface implementation. This is so that if you directly call GetEnumerator(), you get back the type-safe generic IEnumerator<T>. There are times, though, when this rule is broken for reasons of backward compatibility (generics did not exist prior to C# 2.0). A good example is arrays—these must return the nongeneric (the nice way of putting it is “classic”) IEnumerator to prevent breaking earlier code. To get a generic IEnumerator<T>, you must cast to expose the explicit interface:

int[] data = { 1, 2, 3 };
var rator = ((IEnumerable <int>)data).GetEnumerator();
Fortunately, you rarely need to write this sort of code, thanks to the foreach statement.

# IEnumerable<T> and IDisposable
IEnumerator<T> inherits from IDisposable. This allows enumerators to hold references to resources such as database connections—and ensure that those resources are released when enumeration is complete (or abandoned partway through). The foreach statement recognizes this detail and translates the following:

foreach (var element in somethingEnumerable) { ... }
into the logical equivalent of this:

using (var rator = somethingEnumerable.GetEnumerator())
  while (rator.MoveNext())
  {
    var element = rator.Current;
    ...
  }

Given the extra type safety of the generic collection interfaces such as IEnumerable<T>, the question arises: do you ever need to use the nongeneric IEnumerable (or ICollection or IList)?

In the case of IEnumerable, you must implement this interface in conjunction with IEnumerable<T>—because the latter derives from the former. However, it’s very rare that you actually implement these interfaces from scratch: in nearly all cases, you can take the higher-level approach of using iterator methods, Collection<T>, and LINQ.

So, what about as a consumer? In nearly all cases, you can manage entirely with the generic interfaces. The nongeneric interfaces are still occasionally useful, though, in their ability to provide type unification for collections across all element types. The following method, for instance, counts elements in any collection recursively:

public static int Count (IEnumerable e)
{
  int count = 0;
  foreach (object element in e)
  {
    var subCollection = element as IEnumerable;
    if (subCollection != null)
      count += Count (subCollection);
    else
      count++;
  }
  return count;
}
Because C# offers covariance with generic interfaces, it might seem valid to have this method instead accept IEnumerable<object>. This, however, would fail with value-type elements and with legacy collections that don’t implement IEnumerable<T>—an example is ControlCollection in Windows Forms

# Implementing the Enumeration Interfaces
You might want to implement IEnumerable or IEnumerable<T> for one or more of the following reasons:

  - To support the foreach statement
  - To interoperate with anything expecting a standard collection
  - To meet the requirements of a more sophisticated collection interface
  - To support collection initializers

 To implement IEnumerable/IEnumerable<T>, you must provide an enumerator. You can do this in one of three ways:

If the class is “wrapping” another collection, by returning the wrapped collection’s enumerator

Via an iterator using yield return

By instantiating your own IEnumerator/IEnumerator<T> implementation

Returning another collection’s enumerator is just a matter of calling GetEnumerator on the inner collection. However, this is viable only in the simplest scenarios in which the items in the inner collection are exactly what are required. A more flexible approach is to write an iterator, using C#’s yield return statement. An iterator is a C# language feature that assists in writing collections, in the same way the foreach statement assists in consuming collections. An iterator automatically handles the implementation of IEnumerable and IEnumerator—or their generic versions. Here’s a simple example:

public class MyCollection : IEnumerable
{
  int[] data = { 1, 2, 3 };

  public IEnumerator GetEnumerator()
  {
    foreach (int i in data)
      yield return i;
  }
}
Notice the “black magic”: GetEnumerator doesn’t appear to return an enumerator at all! Upon parsing the yield return statement, the compiler writes a hidden nested enumerator class behind the scenes and then refactors GetEnumerator to instantiate and return that class. Iterators are powerful and simple (and are used extensively in the implementation of LINQ-to-Object’s standard query operators).

Keeping with this approach, we can also implement the generic interface IEnumerable<T>:

public class MyGenCollection : IEnumerable<int>
{
  int[] data = { 1, 2, 3 };

  public IEnumerator<int> GetEnumerator()
  {
    foreach (int i in data)
      yield return i;
  }

  // Explicit implementation keeps it hidden:
  IEnumerator IEnumerable.GetEnumerator() => GetEnumerator();
}
Because IEnumerable<T> inherits from IEnumerable, we must implement both the generic and the nongeneric versions of GetEnumerator. In accordance with standard practice, we’ve implemented the nongeneric version explicitly. It can simply call the generic GetEnumerator because IEnumerator<T> inherits from IEnumerator.

The class we’ve just written would be suitable as a basis from which to write a more sophisticated collection. However, if we need nothing above a simple IEnumerable<T> implementation, the yield return statement allows for an easier variation. Rather than writing a class, you can move the iteration logic into a method returning a generic IEnumerable<T> and let the compiler take care of the rest. Here’s an example:

public static IEnumerable <int> GetSomeIntegers()
{
  yield return 1;
  yield return 2;
  yield return 3;
}
Here’s our method in use:

foreach (int i in Test.GetSomeIntegers())
  Console.WriteLine (i);
The final approach in writing GetEnumerator is to write a class that implements IEnumerator directly. This is exactly what the compiler does behind the scenes, in resolving iterators. (Fortunately, it’s rare that you’ll need to go this far yourself.) The following example defines a collection that’s hardcoded to contain the integers 1, 2, and 3:

public class MyIntList : IEnumerable
{
  int[] data = { 1, 2, 3 };

  public IEnumerator GetEnumerator() => new Enumerator (this);

  class Enumerator : IEnumerator       // Define an inner class
  {                                    // for the enumerator.
    MyIntList collection;
    int currentIndex = -1;

    public Enumerator (MyIntList items) => this.collection = items;

    public object Current
    {
      get
      {
        if (currentIndex == -1)
          throw new InvalidOperationException ("Enumeration not started!");
        if (currentIndex == collection.data.Length)
          throw new InvalidOperationException ("Past end of list!");
        return collection.data [currentIndex];
      }
    }

    public bool MoveNext()
    {
      if (currentIndex >= collection.data.Length - 1) return false;
      return ++currentIndex < collection.data.Length;
    }

    public void Reset() => currentIndex = -1;
  }
}
NOTE
Implementing Reset is optional—you can instead throw a NotSupportedException.

Note that the first call to MoveNext should move to the first (and not the second) item in the list.

To get on par with an iterator in functionality, we must also implement IEnumerator<T>. Here’s an example with bounds checking omitted for brevity:

class MyIntList : IEnumerable<int>
{
  int[] data = { 1, 2, 3 };

  // The generic enumerator is compatible with both IEnumerable and
  // IEnumerable<T>. We implement the nongeneric GetEnumerator method
  // explicitly to avoid a naming conflict.

  public IEnumerator<int> GetEnumerator() => new Enumerator(this);
  IEnumerator IEnumerable.GetEnumerator() => new Enumerator(this);

  class Enumerator : IEnumerator<int>
  {
    int currentIndex = -1;
    MyIntList collection;

    public Enumerator (MyIntList items) => this.items = items;

    public int Current => collection.data [currentIndex];
    object IEnumerator.Current => Current;

    public bool MoveNext() => ++currentIndex < collection.data.Length;

    public void Reset() => currentIndex = -1;

    // Given we don't need a Dispose method, it's good practice to
    // implement it explicitly, so it's hidden from the public interface.
    void IDisposable.Dispose() {}
  }
}
The example with generics is faster because IEnumerator<int>.Current doesn’t require casting from int to object and so avoids the overhead of boxing.