# IEqualityComparer and EqualityComparer
An equality comparer switches in nondefault equality and hashing behavior, primarily for the Dictionary and Hashtable classes.

Recall the requirements of a hashtable-based dictionary. It needs answers to two questions for any given key:

Is it the same as another?

What is its integer hashcode?

An equality comparer answers these questions by implementing the IEquality​Com⁠parer interfaces:
```c#
public interface IEqualityComparer<T>
{
   bool Equals (T x, T y);
   int GetHashCode (T obj);
}

public interface IEqualityComparer     // Nongeneric version
{
   bool Equals (object x, object y);
   int GetHashCode (object obj);
}
```
The semantics for Equals and GetHashCode follow the same rules for object​.Equals and object.GetHashCode, described in Chapter 6. In the following example, we define a Customer class with two fields and then write an equality comparer that matches both the first and last names:
```c#
public class Customer
{
  public string LastName;
  public string FirstName;

  public Customer (string last, string first)
  {
    LastName = last;
    FirstName = first;
  }
}
public class LastFirstEqComparer : EqualityComparer <Customer>
{
  public override bool Equals (Customer x, Customer y)
    => x.LastName == y.LastName && x.FirstName == y.FirstName;

  public override int GetHashCode (Customer obj)
    => (obj.LastName + ";" + obj.FirstName).GetHashCode();
}
```
To illustrate how this works, let’s create two customers:

Customer c1 = new Customer ("Bloggs", "Joe");
Customer c2 = new Customer ("Bloggs", "Joe");
Because we’ve not overridden object.Equals, normal reference type equality semantics apply:

Console.WriteLine (c1 == c2);               // False
Console.WriteLine (c1.Equals (c2));         // False
The same default equality semantics apply when using these customers in a Dictionary without specifying an equality comparer:

var d = new Dictionary<Customer, string>();
d [c1] = "Joe";
Console.WriteLine (d.ContainsKey (c2));         // False

The same default equality semantics apply when using these customers in a Dictionary without specifying an equality comparer:
```c#
var d = new Dictionary<Customer, string>();
d [c1] = "Joe";
Console.WriteLine (d.ContainsKey (c2));         // False
```
Now, with the custom equality comparer:

var eqComparer = new LastFirstEqComparer();
var d = new Dictionary<Customer, string> (eqComparer);
d [c1] = "Joe";
Console.WriteLine (d.ContainsKey (c2));         // True
In this example, we would have to be careful not to change the customer’s FirstName or LastName while it was in use in the dictionary; otherwise, its hashcode would change and the Dictionary would break.

# EqualityComparer<T>.Default
Calling EqualityComparer<T>.Default returns a general-purpose equality comparer that you can use as an alternative to the static object.Equals method. The advantage is that it first checks whether T implements IEquatable<T>, and if so, it calls that implementation instead, avoiding the boxing overhead. This is particularly useful in generic methods:

static bool Foo<T> (T x, T y)
{
  bool same = EqualityComparer<T>.Default.Equals (x, y);
  ...
# ReferenceEqualityComparer.Instance (.NET 5+)
From .NET 5, ReferenceEqualityComparer.Instance returns an equality comparer that always applies referential equality. In the case of value types, its Equals method always returns false.

