# The ICollection and IList Interfaces
Although the enumeration interfaces provide a protocol for forward-only iteration over a collection, they don’t provide a mechanism to determine the size of the collection, access a member by index, search, or modify the collection. For such functionality, .NET defines the ICollection, IList, and IDictionary interfaces. Each comes in both generic and nongeneric versions; however, the nongeneric versions exist mostly for legacy support.

`IEnumerable<T> (and IEnumerable)`: Provides minimum functionality (enumeration only)
`ICollection<T> (and ICollection)`: Provides medium functionality (e.g., the Count property)
`IList<T>/IDictionary<K,V> and their nongeneric versions`:Provide maximum functionality (including “random” access by index/key)

`Note`: It’s rare that you’ll need to implement any of these interfaces. In nearly all cases when you need to write a collection class, you can instead subclass Collection<T> (see “Customizable Collections and Proxies”). LINQ provides yet another option that covers many scenarios.

# ICollection<T> and ICollection
ICollection<T> is the standard interface for countable collections of objects. It provides the ability to determine the size of a collection `(Count)`, determine whether an item exists in the collection `(Contains)`, copy the collection into an array `(ToArray)`, and determine whether the collection is read-only `(IsReadOnly)`.

For writable collections, you can also `Add, Remove, and Clear items from the collection. And because it extends IEnumerable<T>, it can also be traversed via the foreach statement:`

```c#
public interface ICollection<T> : IEnumerable<T>, IEnumerable
{
  int Count { get; }

  bool Contains (T item);
  void CopyTo (T[] array, int arrayIndex);
  bool IsReadOnly { get; }

  void Add(T item);
  bool Remove (T item);
  void Clear();
}
```

The nongeneric ICollection is similar in providing a countable collection, but it doesn’t provide functionality for altering the list or checking for element membership:
```c#
public interface ICollection : IEnumerable
{
   int Count { get; }
   bool IsSynchronized { get; }
   object SyncRoot { get; }
   void CopyTo (Array array, int index);
}
```
The nongeneric interface also defines properties to assist with synchronization (Chapter 14)—these were dumped in the generic version because thread safety is no longer considered intrinsic to the collection.

Both interfaces are fairly straightforward to implement. If implementing a `read-only ICollection<T>`, the Add, Remove, and Clear methods should throw a NotSupported​Exception.
These interfaces are usually implemented in conjunction with either the IList or the IDictionary interface.

# WHen to use Icollection over Icollection<T>?
`ICollection` is the non-generic version of ICollection<T> and is generally used in scenarios where you need to work with collections of objects of different types or when you don't know the type of objects that will be added to the collection at design time.

`ICollection<T>` is the generic version and should be used when you know the type of objects that will be added to the collection at design time. It offers strong typing and is more efficient as it avoids the need to box and unbox objects at runtime.

In general, `it's recommended to use ICollection<T> over ICollection whenever possible because it provides better type safety and performance`. However, if you need to work with collections of objects of different types or if you need to maintain compatibility with legacy code that uses ICollection, then you may need to use ICollection.
# Thread safety of ICollection and ICollection<T>
Both ICollection and ICollection<T> do not provide any thread-safety guarantees. Any thread-safety considerations must be handled by the implementation of the collection itself.

In general, accessing a collection from multiple threads simultaneously can cause issues like race conditions and concurrency violations. To ensure thread-safety, it's usually necessary to use synchronization techniques like locking or other mechanisms like concurrent collections provided by .NET framework.

# IList<T> and IList
IList<T> is the standard interface for collections indexable by position. In addition to the functionality inherited from ICollection<T> and IEnumerable<T>, it provides the ability to read or write an element by position (via an indexer) and insert/remove by position:
```c#
public interface IList<T> : ICollection<T>, IEnumerable<T>, IEnumerable
{
  T this [int index] { get; set; }
  int IndexOf (T item);
  void Insert (int index, T item);
  void RemoveAt (int index);
}
```
The IndexOf methods perform a linear search on the list, returning −1 if the specified item is not found.

The nongeneric version of IList has more members because it inherits less from ICollection:
```C#
public interface IList : ICollection, IEnumerable
{
  object this [int index] { get; set }
  bool IsFixedSize { get; }
  bool IsReadOnly  { get; }
  int  Add      (object value);
  void Clear();
  bool Contains (object value);
  int  IndexOf  (object value);
  void Insert   (int index, object value);
  void Remove   (object value);
  void RemoveAt (int index);
}
```
The Add method on the nongeneric IList interface returns an integer—this is the index of the newly added item. In contrast, the Add method on ICollection<T> has a void return type.

The general-purpose List<T> class is the quintessential implementation of both IList<T> and IList. C# arrays also implement both the generic and nongeneric ILists (although the methods that add or remove elements are hidden via explicit interface implementation and throw a NotSupportedException if called).
`NOTE`:
WARNING
An ArgumentException is thrown if you try to access a multidimensional array via IList’s indexer. This is a trap when writing methods such as the following:

public object FirstOrNull (IList list)
{
  if (list == null || list.Count == 0) return null;
  return list[0];
}
This might appear bulletproof, but it will throw an exception if called with a multidimensional array. You can test for a multidimensional array at runtime with this expression (more on this in Chapter 19):

list.GetType().IsArray && list.GetType().GetArrayRank()>1

# IReadOnlyCollection<T> and IReadOnlyList<T>
.NET also defines collection and list interfaces that expose just the members required for read-only operations:

public interface IReadOnlyCollection<out T> : IEnumerable<T>, IEnumerable
{
  int Count { get; }
}

public interface IReadOnlyList<out T> : IReadOnlyCollection<T>,
                                        IEnumerable<T>, IEnumerable
{
  T this[int index] { get; }
}
Because the type parameter for these interfaces is used only in output positions, it’s marked as covariant. This allows a list of cats, for instance, to be treated as a read-only list of animals. In contrast, T is not marked as covariant with ICollection<T> and IList<T>, because T is used in both input and output positions.

These interfaces represent a read-only view of a collection or list; the underlying implementation might still be writable. Most of the writable (mutable) collections implement both the read-only and read/write interfaces.

In addition to letting you work with collections covariantly, the read-only interfaces allow a class to publicly expose a read-only view of a private writable collection. We demonstrate this—along with a better solution—in “ReadOnlyCollection<T>”.

IReadOnlyList<T> maps to the Windows Runtime type IVectorView<T>.