# Utf8JsonWriter
System.Text.Json.Utf8JsonWriter is a forward-only JSON writer. It supports the following types:
  - String and DateTime (which is formatted as a JSON string)
  - The numeric types Int32, UInt32, Int64, UInt64, Single, Double, and Decimal (which are formatted as JSON numbers)
  - bool (formatted as JSON true/false literals)
  - JSON null
  - Arrays

You can organize these data types into objects in accordance with the JSON standard. It also lets you write comments, which are not part of the JSON standard but are often supported by JSON parsers in practice.

The following code demonstrates its use:
```json
var options = new JsonWriterOptions { Indented = true };

using (var stream = File.Create ("MyFile.json"))
using (var writer = new Utf8JsonWriter (stream, options))
{
  writer.WriteStartObject();
  // Property name and value specified in one call
  writer.WriteString ("FirstName", "Dylan");
  writer.WriteString ("LastName", "Lockwood");
  // Property name and value specified in separate calls
  writer.WritePropertyName ("Age");
  writer.WriteNumberValue (46);
  writer.WriteCommentValue ("This is a (non-standard) comment");
  writer.WriteEndObject();
}
```

From .NET 6, Utf8JsonWriter has a `WriteRawValue` method to emit a string or byte array directly into the JSON stream. This is useful in special cases—for instance, `if you want a number to be written such that it always includes a decimal point (1.0 rather than 1)`.

In this example, we set the `Indented` property on JsonWriterOptions to true to` improve readability`. Had we not done so, the output would be as follows:
```c#
{"FirstName":"Dylan","LastName":"Lockwood","Age":46...}
```
The JsonWriterOptions also has an `Encoder` property to control the escaping of strings, and a `SkipValidation` property to allow structural validation checks to be bypassed (allowing the emission of invalid output JSON).

# JsonDocument
System.Text.Json.JsonDocument parses JSON data into a read-only DOM composed of JsonElement instances that are generated on demand. Unlike Utf8JsonReader, JsonDocument lets you access elements randomly.

JsonDocument is one of two DOM-based APIs for working with JSON, the other being JsonNode (which we will cover in the following section). JsonNode was introduced in .NET 6, primarily to satisfy the demand for a writable DOM. However, it’s also suitable in read-only scenarios and exposes a somewhat more fluent interface, backed by a traditional DOM that uses classes for JSON values, arrays, and objects. In contrast, JsonDocument is extremely lightweight, comprising just one class of note (JsonDocument) and two lightweight structs (JsonElement and JsonProperty) that parse the underlying data on demand.
`Note`
`JsonDocument further improves its efficiency by employing pooled memory to minimize garbage collection. This means that you must dispose the JsonDocument after use`; otherwise, its memory will not be returned to the pool. Consequently, when a class stores a JsonDocument in a field, it must also implement IDisposable. Should this be burdensome, consider using JsonNode instead.

The static Parse method instantiates a JsonDocument from a stream, string, or memory buffer:
```c#`
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse (jsonString);
```
...
When calling Parse, you can optionally provide a JsonDocumentOptions object to control the handling of trailing commas, comments, and the maximum nesting depth (for a discussion on how these options work, see “JsonReaderOptions”).

From there, you can access the DOM via the RootElement property:
```c#
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse ("123");
JsonElement root = document.RootElement;
Console.WriteLine (root.ValueKind);       // Number
```
`JsonElement` can represent a JSON value `(string, number, true/false, null), array, or object; the ValueKind property indicates which.`  

`NOTE`
The methods that we describe in the following sections throw an exception if the element isn’t of the kind expected. If you’re not sure of a JSON file’s schema, you can avoid such exceptions by checking ValueKind first (or by using the TryGet* methods).

JsonElement also provides two methods that work for any kind of element: GetRawText() returns the inner JSON, and WriteTo writes that element to a Utf8JsonWriter.

# Reading simple values
If the element represents a JSON value, you can obtain its value by calling GetString, GetInt32, GetBoolean, etc.):

using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse ("123");
int number = document.RootElement.GetInt32();
JsonElement also provides methods to parse JSON strings into other commonly used CLR types such as DateTime (and even base-64 binary). There are also TryGet* versions that avoid throwing an exception if the parse fails.

# Reading JSON arrays
If the JsonElement represents an array, you can call the following methods:

EnumerateArray()
Enumerates all the subitems for a JSON array (as JsonElements).
GetArrayLength()
Returns the number of elements in the array.
You can also use the indexer to return an element at a specific position:
```c#
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse (@"[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]");
int length = document.RootElement.GetArrayLength();   // 5
int value  = document.RootElement[3].GetInt32();      // 4
```

# Reading JSON objects
If the element represents a JSON object, you can call the following methods:

EnumerateObject()
Enumerates all of the object’s property names and values.
GetProperty (string propertyName)
Gets a property by name (returning another JsonElement). Throws an exception if the name isn’t present.
TryGetProperty (string propertyName, out JsonElement value)
Returns an object’s property if present.
For example:
```c#
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse (@"{ ""Age"": 32}");
JsonElement root = document.RootElement;
int age = root.GetProperty ("Age").GetInt32();
```
Here’s how we could “discover” the Age property:
```c#
JsonProperty ageProp = root.EnumerateObject().First();
string name = ageProp.Name;             // Age
JsonElement value = ageProp.Value;
Console.WriteLine (value.ValueKind);    // Number
Console.WriteLine (value.GetInt32());   // 32
```
# JsonDocument and LINQ
JsonDocument lends itself well to LINQ. Given the following JSON file:
```json
[
  {
    "FirstName":"Sara",
    "LastName":"Wells",
    "Age":35,
    "Friends":["Ian"]
  },
  {
    "FirstName":"Ian",
    "LastName":"Weems",
    "Age":42,
    "Friends":["Joe","Eric","Li"]
  },
  {
    "FirstName":"Dylan",
    "LastName":"Lockwood",
    "Age":46,
    "Friends":["Sara","Ian"]
  }
]
```
we can use JsonDocument to query this with LINQ, as follows:
```c#
using var stream = File.OpenRead (jsonPath);
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse (json);

var query =
  from person in document.RootElement.EnumerateArray()
  select new
  {
    FirstName = person.GetProperty ("FirstName").GetString(),
    Age = person.GetProperty ("Age").GetInt32(),
    Friends = 
      from friend in person.GetProperty ("Friends").EnumerateArray()
      select friend.GetString()
  };
```
Because LINQ queries are lazily evaluated, it’s important to enumerate the query before the document goes out of scope and JsonDocument is implicitly disposed of by virtue of the using statement.

# Making updates with a JSON writer
Although JsonDocument is read-only, you can send the content of a JsonElement to a Utf8JsonWriter with the WriteTo method. This provides a mechanism for emitting a modified version of the JSON. Here’s how we can take the JSON from the preceding example and write it to a new JSON file that includes only people with two or more friends:

using var json = File.OpenRead (jsonPath);
using JsonDocument document = JsonDocument.Parse (json);

var options = new JsonWriterOptions { Indented = true };

using (var outputStream = File.Create ("NewFile.json"))
using (var writer = new Utf8JsonWriter (outputStream, options))
{
  writer.WriteStartArray();
  foreach (var person in document.RootElement.EnumerateArray())
  {
    int friendCount = person.GetProperty ("Friends").GetArrayLength();
    if (friendCount >= 2)
      person.WriteTo (writer);
  }
}
If you need the ability to update the DOM, however, JsonNode is a better solution.

