# JsonNode
JsonNode (in System.Text.Json.Nodes) was introduced in .NET 6, primarily to satisfy the demand for a writable DOM. However, it’s also suitable in read-only scenarios and exposes a somewhat more fluent interface, backed by a traditional DOM that uses classes for JSON values, arrays, and objects (see Figure 11-1). Being classes, they incur a garbage-collection cost, but this is likely to be negligible in most real-world scenarios. `JsonNode is still highly optimized and can actually be faster than JsonDocument when the same nodes are read repeatedly (because JsonNode, while lazy, caches the results of parsing).`

The static Parse method creates a JsonNode from a stream, string, memory buffer, or Utf8JsonReader:

JsonNode node = JsonNode.Parse (jsonString);
When calling Parse, you can optionally provide a JsonDocumentOptions object to control the handling of trailing commas, comments, and the maximum nesting depth (for a discussion on how these options work, see “JsonReaderOptions”). Unlike JsonDocument, JsonNode does not require disposal.

`NOTE`
`Calling ToString() on a JsonNode returns a human-readable (indented) JSON string. There is also a ToJsonString() method, which returns a compact JSON string.`

Parse returns a subtype of JsonNode, which will be JsonValue, JsonObject, or JsonArray. To avoid the clutter of a downcast, JsonNode provides helper methods called AsValue(), AsObject(), and AsArray():
```c#
var node = JsonNode.Parse ("123");  // Parses to a JsonValue
int number = node.AsValue().GetValue<int>();
// Shortcut for ((JsonValue)node).GetValue<int>();
```
However, you don’t usually need to call these methods, because the most commonly used members are exposed on the JsonNode class itself:

var node = JsonNode.Parse ("123");
int number = node.GetValue<int>();
// Shortcut for node.AsValue().GetValue<int>();

# Reading simple values
We just saw that you can extract or parse a simple value by calling GetValue with a type parameter. To make this even easier, JsonNode overloads C#’s explicit cast operators, enabling the following shortcut:

var node = JsonNode.Parse ("123");
int number = (int) node;
The types for which this works comprise the standard numeric types: char, bool, DateTime, DateTimeOffset, and Guid (and their nullable versions), as well as string.

If you’re not sure whether parsing will succeed, the following code is required:

if (node.AsValue().TryGetValue<int> (out var number))
  Console.WriteLine (number);
NOTE
Nodes that have been parsed from JSON text are internally backed by a JsonElement (part of the JsonDocument read-only JSON API). You can extract the underlying JsonElement as follows:

JsonElement je = node.GetValue<JsonElement>();
However, this doesn’t work when the node is instantiated explicitly (as will be the case when we update the DOM). Such nodes are backed not by a JsonElement but by the actual parsed value (see “Making updates with JsonNode”).

# Reading JSON arrays
A JsonNode that represents a JSON array will be of type JsonArray.

JsonArray implements IList<JsonNode>, so you can enumerate over it and access the elements like you would an array or list:

var node = JsonNode.Parse (@"[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]");
Console.WriteLine (node.AsArray().Count);       // 5

foreach (JsonNode child in node.AsArray())
{ ... }
As a shortcut, you can access the indexer directly from the JsonNode class:

Console.WriteLine ((int)node[0]);   // 1

# Reading JSON objects
A JsonNode that represents a JSON object will be of type JsonObject.

JsonObject implements IDictionary<string,JsonNode>, so you can access a member via the indexer, as well as enumerating over the dictionary’s key/value pairs.

And as with JsonArray, you can access the indexer directly from the JsonNode class:

var node = JsonNode.Parse (@"{ ""Name"":""Alice"", ""Age"": 32}");
string name = (string) node ["Name"];   // Alice
int age = (int) node ["Age"];           // 32
Here’s how we could “discover” the Name and Age properties:

// Enumerate over the dictionary’s key/value pairs:
foreach (KeyValuePair<string,JsonNode> keyValuePair in node.AsObject())
{
  string propertyName = keyValuePair.Key;   // "Name" (then "Age")
  JsonNode value = keyValuePair.Value; 
}
If you’re not sure whether a property has been defined, the following pattern also works:

if (node.AsObject().TryGetPropertyValue ("Name", out JsonNode nameNode))
{ ... }

# Fluent traversal and LINQ
You can reach deep into a hierarchy just with indexers. For example, given the following JSON file:

[
  {
    "FirstName":"Sara",
    "LastName":"Wells",
    "Age":35,
    "Friends":["Ian"]
  },
  {
    "FirstName":"Ian",
    "LastName":"Weems",
    "Age":42,
    "Friends":["Joe","Eric","Li"]
  },
  {
    "FirstName":"Dylan",
    "LastName":"Lockwood",
    "Age":46,
    "Friends":["Sara","Ian"]
  }
]
we can extract the second person’s third friend as follows:

string li = (string) node[1]["Friends"][2];
Such a file is also easy to query via LINQ:

JsonNode node = JsonNode.Parse (File.ReadAllText (jsonPath));

var query =
  from person in node.AsArray()
  select new
  {
    FirstName = (string) person ["FirstName"],
    Age = (int) person ["Age"],
    Friends =
      from friend in person ["Friends"].AsArray()
      select (string) friend
  };
Unlike JsonDocument, JsonNode is not disposable, so we don’t have to worry about the potential for disposal during lazy enumeration.

# Making updates with JsonNode
JsonObject and JsonArray are mutable, so you can update their content.

The easiest way to replace or add properties to a JsonObject is via the indexer. In the following example, we change the Color property’s value from “Red” to “White” and add a new property called “Valid”:

var node = JsonNode.Parse ("{ \"Color\": \"Red\" }");
node ["Color"] = "White";
node ["Valid"] = true;
Console.WriteLine (node.ToJsonString());  // {"Color":"White","Valid":true}
The second line in that example is a shortcut for the following:

node ["Color"] = JsonValue.Create ("White");
Rather than assigning the property a simple value, you can assign it a JsonArray or JsonObject. (We will demonstrate how to construct JsonArray and JsonObject instances in the following section.)

To remove a property, first cast to JsonObject (or call AsObject) and then call the Remove method:

node.AsObject().Remove ("Valid");
(JsonObject also exposes an Add method, which throws an exception if the property already exists.)

JsonArray also lets you use the indexer to replace items:

var node = JsonNode.Parse ("[1, 2, 3]");
node[0] = 10;
Calling AsArray exposes the Add/Insert/Remove/RemoveAt methods. In the following example, we remove the first element in the array and add one to the end:

var arrayNode = JsonNode.Parse ("[1, 2, 3]");
arrayNode.AsArray().RemoveAt(0);
arrayNode.AsArray().Add (4);
Console.WriteLine (arrayNode.ToJsonString());  // [2,3,4]

# Constructing a JsonNode DOM programmatically
JsonArray and JsonObject have constructors that support object initialization syntax, which allows you to build an entire JsonNode DOM in one expression:

var node = new JsonArray 
{
  new JsonObject {
    ["Name"] = "Tracy",
    ["Age"] = 30,
    ["Friends"] = new JsonArray ("Lisa", "Joe")
  },
  new JsonObject {
    ["Name"] = "Jordyn",
    ["Age"] = 25,
    ["Friends"] = new JsonArray ("Tracy", "Li")
  }
};
This evaluates to the following JSON:

[
  {
    "Name": "Tracy",
    "Age": 30,
    "Friends": ["Lisa", "Joe"]
  },
  {
    "Name": "Jordyn",
    "Age": 25,
    "Friends": ["Tracy","Li"]
  }
]