# Type and Parameter Marshaling

# Marshaling Common Types

On the unmanaged side, there can be more than one way to represent a given data type. A string, for instance, can contain single-byte ANSI characters or UTF-16 Unicode characters, and can be length prefixed, null terminated, or of fixed length. With the MarshalAs attribute, you can specify to the CLR marshaler the variation in use, so it can provide the correct translation. Here’s an example:
[DllImport("...")]
static extern int Foo ( [MarshalAs (UnmanagedType.LPStr)] string s );
The UnmanagedType enumeration includes all the Win32 and COM types that the marshaler understands. In this case, the marshaler was told to translate to LPStr, which is a null-terminated single-byte ANSI string.
On the .NET side, you also have some choice as to what data type to use. Unman‐ aged handles, for instance, can map to IntPtr, int, uint, long, or ulong.
Most unmanaged handles encapsulate an address or pointer and so must be mapped to IntPtr for compatibility with both 32- and 64-bit operating systems. A typical example is HWND.
Quite often with Win32 and POSIX functions, you come across an integer parame‐ ter that accepts a set of constants, defined in a C++ header file such as WinUser.h. Rather than defining these as simple C# constants, you can define them within an enum instead. Using an enum can make for tidier code as well as increase static type safety. We provide an example in “Shared Memory” on page 971.

Receiving strings from unmanaged code back to .NET requires that some memory management take place. The marshaler automatically performs this work if you declare the external method with a StringBuilder rather than a string, as follows:
    StringBuilder s = new StringBuilder (256);
    GetWindowsDirectory (s, 256);
    Console.WriteLine (s);
    [DllImport("kernel32.dll")]
    static extern int GetWindowsDirectory (StringBuilder sb, int maxChars);
On Unix, it works similarly. The following calls getcwd to return the current directory:
    var sb = new StringBuilder (256);
    Console.WriteLine (getcwd (sb, sb.Capacity));
    [DllImport("libc")]
    static extern string getcwd (StringBuilder buf, int size);
Although StringBuilder is convenient to use, it’s somewhat inefficient in that the CLR must perform additional memory allocations and copying. In performance hotspots, you can avoid this overhead by using char[] instead:
[DllImport ("kernel32.dll", CharSet = CharSet.Unicode)]
static extern int GetWindowsDirectory (char[] buffer, int maxChars);
Notice that you must specify a CharSet in the DllImport attribute. You must also trim the output string to length after calling the function. You can achieve this while minimizing memory allocations with the use of array pooling (see “Array Pooling” on page 575), as follows:

```c#
string GetWindowsDirectory()
    {
      var array = ArrayPool<char>.Shared.Rent (256);
      try
      {
        int length = GetWindowsDirectory (array, 256);
             return new string (array, 0, length).ToString();
      }
      finally { ArrayPool<char>.Shared.Return (array); }
    }
```

# Marshaling Classes and Structs
Sometimes, you need to pass a struct to an unmanaged method. For example, GetSystemTime in the Win32 API is defined as follows:
void GetSystemTime (LPSYSTEMTIME lpSystemTime); LPSYSTEMTIME conforms to this C struct:
    typedef struct _SYSTEMTIME {
      WORD wYear;
      WORD wMonth;
      WORD wDayOfWeek;
      WORD wDay;
      WORD wHour;
      WORD wMinute;
      WORD wSecond;
      WORD wMilliseconds;
} SYSTEMTIME, *PSYSTEMTIME;
To call GetSystemTime, we must define a .NET class or struct that matches this C
struct:

  using System;
    using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
    [StructLayout(LayoutKind.Sequential)]
    class SystemTime
    {
       public ushort Year;
       public ushort Month;
       public ushort DayOfWeek;
       public ushort Day;
       public ushort Hour;
       public ushort Minute;
       public ushort Second;
       public ushort Milliseconds;
}

The StructLayout attribute instructs the marshaler how to map each field to its unmanaged counterpart. LayoutKind.Sequential means that we want the fields aligned sequentially on pack-size boundaries (you’ll see what this means shortly), just as they would be in a C struct. The field names here are irrelevant; it’s the ordering of fields that’s important.
Now we can call GetSystemTime:
SystemTime t = new SystemTime(); GetSystemTime (t); Console.WriteLine (t.Year);
    [DllImport("kernel32.dll")]
    static extern void GetSystemTime (SystemTime t);
Similarly, on Unix:
    Console.WriteLine (GetSystemTime());
    static DateTime GetSystemTime()
    {
      DateTime startOfUnixTime =
        new DateTime(1970, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, System.DateTimeKind.Utc);
      Timespec tp = new Timespec();
      int success = clock_gettime (0, ref tp);
      if (success != 0) throw new Exception ("Error checking the time.");
      return startOfUnixTime.AddSeconds (tp.tv_sec).ToLocalTime();
}
    [DllImport("libc")]
    static extern int clock_gettime (int clk_id, ref Timespec tp);
    [StructLayout(LayoutKind.Sequential)]
    struct Timespec
    {
      public long tv_sec;   /* seconds */
      public long tv_nsec;  /* nanoseconds */
    }


# In and Out Marshaling
In the previous example, we implemented SystemTime as a class. We could have instead chosen a struct—provided that GetSystemTime was declared with a ref or out parameter:
    [DllImport("kernel32.dll")]
    static extern void GetSystemTime (out SystemTime t);
In most cases, C#’s directional parameter semantics work the same with external methods. Pass-by-value parameters are copied in, C# ref parameters are copied in/out, and C# out parameters are copied out. However, there are some exceptions for types that have special conversions. For instance, array classes and the String Builder class require copying when coming out of a function, so they are in/out. It is occasionally useful to override this behavior, with the In and Out attributes. For example, if an array should be read-only, the in modifier indicates to copy only the array going into the function, not coming out of it:
static extern void Foo ( [In] int[] array);

# Calling Conventions

Unmanaged methods receive arguments and return values via the stack and (optionally) CPU registers. Because there’s more than one way to accomplish this, a number of different protocols have emerged. These protocols are known as calling conventions.
The CLR currently supports three calling conventions: StdCall, Cdecl, and ThisCall.
By default, the CLR uses the platform default calling convention (the standard convention for that platform). On Windows, it’s StdCall, and on Linux x86, it’s Cdecl.
Should an unmanaged method not follow this default, you can explicitly state its calling convention as follows:
[DllImport ("MyLib.dll", CallingConvention=CallingConvention.Cdecl)] static extern void SomeFunc (...)
The somewhat misleadingly named CallingConvention.WinApi refers to the plat‐ form default.

