# Callbacks from Unmanaged Code

C# also allows external functions to call C# code, via callbacks. There are two ways to accomplish callbacks:
• Via function pointers (from C# 9)
• Via delegates
To illustrate, we will call the following Windows function in User32.dll, which enumerates all top-level window handles:
BOOL EnumWindows (WNDENUMPROC lpEnumFunc, LPARAM lParam);
WNDENUMPROC is a callback that is fired with the handle of each window in sequence
(or until the callback returns false). Here is its definition:
BOOL CALLBACK EnumWindowsProc (HWND hwnd, LPARAM lParam);

# Callbacks with Function Pointers
From C# 9, the simplest and most performant option—when your callback is a static method—is to use a function pointer. In the case of the WNDENUMPROC callback, we can use the following function pointer:
delegate*<IntPtr, IntPtr, bool>
This denotes a function that accepts two IntPtr arguments and returns a bool. You can then use the & operator to feed it a static method:
using System;
using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
unsafe {
EnumWindows (&PrintWindow, IntPtr.Zero);
[DllImport ("user32.dll")] static extern int EnumWindows (
delegate*<IntPtr, IntPtr, bool> hWnd, IntPtr lParam);
static bool PrintWindow (IntPtr hWnd, IntPtr lParam) {
        Console.WriteLine (hWnd.ToInt64());
        return true;
      }
}
With function pointers, the callback must be a static method (or a static local function, as in this example).

# UnmanagedCallersOnly
You can improve performance by applying the unmanaged keyword to the function pointer declaration, and the [UnmanagedCallersOnly] attribute to the callback method:
    using System;
    using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;
    using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
unsafe {
      EnumWindows (&PrintWindow, IntPtr.Zero);
      [DllImport ("user32.dll")]
      static extern int EnumWindows (
delegate* unmanaged <IntPtr, IntPtr, byte> hWnd, IntPtr lParam);
      [UnmanagedCallersOnly]
static byte PrintWindow (IntPtr hWnd, IntPtr lParam) {
        Console.WriteLine (hWnd.ToInt64());
return 1; }
}
This attribute flags the PrintWindow method such that it can be called only from unmanaged code, allowing the runtime to take shortcuts. Notice that we’ve also changed the method’s return type from bool to byte: this is because methods to which you apply [UnmanagedCallersOnly] can use only blittable value types in the signature. Blittable types are those that don’t require any special marshalling logic because they’re represented identically in the managed and unmanaged worlds. These include the primitive integral types, float, double, and structs that contain only blittable types. The char type is also blittable, if part of a struct with a Struct Layout attribute specifying CharSet.Unicode:
[StructLayout (LayoutKind.Sequential, CharSet=CharSet.Unicode)]

#  Nondefault calling conventions
By default, the compiler assumes that the unmanaged callback follows the platform- default calling convention. Should this not be so, you can explicitly state its calling convention via the CallConvs parameter of the [UnmanagedCallersOnly] attribute:
[UnmanagedCallersOnly (CallConvs = new[] { typeof (CallConvStdcall) })] static byte PrintWindow (IntPtr hWnd, IntPtr lParam) ...
You must also update the function pointer type by inserting a special modifier after the unmanaged keyword:
delegate* unmanaged[Stdcall] <IntPtr, IntPtr, byte> hWnd, IntPtr lParam);

In this case, we specified StdCall, which is the platform default for Windows (Cdecl is the default for Linux x86). Here are all the options that are currently supported:
Name unmanaged modifier Supporting type
Stdcall unmanaged[Stdcall] CallConvStdcall Cdecl unmanaged[Cdecl] CallConvCdecl ThisCall unmanaged[Thiscall] CallConvThiscall

# Callbacks with Delegates
Unmanaged callbacks can also be accomplished with delegates. This approach works in all versions of C#, and allows for callbacks that reference instance methods.
To proceed, first declare a delegate type with a signature that matches the callback. Then you can pass a delegate instance to the external method:
    class CallbackFun
    {
      delegate bool EnumWindowsCallback (IntPtr hWnd, IntPtr lParam);
[DllImport("user32.dll")]
static extern int EnumWindows (EnumWindowsCallback hWnd, IntPtr lParam);
static bool PrintWindow (IntPtr hWnd, IntPtr lParam) {
        Console.WriteLine (hWnd.ToInt64());
        return true;
      }
      static readonly EnumWindowsCallback printWindowFunc = PrintWindow;
      static void Main() => EnumWindows (printWindowFunc, IntPtr.Zero);
    }
Using delegates for unmanaged callbacks is ironically unsafe, because it’s easy to fall into the trap of allowing a callback to occur after the delegate instance falls out of scope (at which point the delegate becomes eligible for garbage collection). This can result in the worst kind of runtime exception—one with no useful stack trace. In the case of static method callbacks, you can avoid this by assigning the delegate instance to a read-only static field (as we did in this example). With instance method callbacks, this pattern won’t help, so you must code carefully to ensure that you maintain at least one reference to the delegate instance for the duration of any potential callback. Even then, if there’s a bug on the unmanaged side—whereby

it invokes a callback after you’ve told it not to—you may still have to deal with an untraceable exception. A workaround is to define a unique delegate type per unmanaged function: this helps diagnostically because the delegate type is reported in the exception.
You can change the callback’s calling convention from the platform default by applying the [UnmanagedFunctionPointer] attribute to the delegate:
[UnmanagedFunctionPointer (CallingConvention.Cdecl)] delegate void MyCallback (int foo, short bar);