# Simulating a C Union


Each field in a struct is given enough room to store its data. Consider a struct containing one int and one char. The int is likely to start at an offset of 0 and is guaranteed at least four bytes. So, the char would start at an offset of at least 4. If, for some reason, the char started at an offset of 2, you’d change the value of the int if you assigned a value to the char. Sounds like mayhem, doesn’t it? Strangely enough, the C language supports a variation on a struct called a union that does exactly this. You can simulate this in C# by using LayoutKind.Explicit and the FieldOffset attribute.
It might be challenging to think of a case in which this would be useful. However, suppose that you want to play a note on an external synthesizer. The Windows Multimedia API provides a function for doing just this via the MIDI protocol:
[DllImport ("winmm.dll")]
public static extern uint midiOutShortMsg (IntPtr handle, uint message);
The second argument, message, describes what note to play. The problem is in con‐ structing this 32-bit unsigned integer: it’s divided internally into bytes, representing a MIDI channel, note, and velocity at which to strike. One solution is to shift and mask via the bitwise <<, >>, &, and | operators to convert these bytes to and from the 32-bit “packed” message. Far simpler, though, is to define a struct with explicit layout:
[StructLayout (LayoutKind.Explicit)]
public struct NoteMessage
{
  [FieldOffset(0)] public uint PackedMsg;
[FieldOffset(0)] public byte Channel; [FieldOffset(1)] public byte Note; [FieldOffset(2)] public byte Velocity;
}
// 4 bytes long
// FieldOffset also at 0
The Channel, Note, and Velocity fields deliberately overlap with the 32-bit packed message. This allows you to read and write using either. No calculations are required to keep other fields in sync:
NoteMessage n = new NoteMessage(); Console.WriteLine (n.PackedMsg); // 0
 n.Channel = 10;
    n.Note = 100;
    n.Velocity = 50;
    Console.WriteLine (n.PackedMsg);
    n.PackedMsg = 3328010;
    Console.WriteLine (n.Note);
// 3302410 // 200