# fixed and fixed {...}
One limitation of mapping structs directly into memory is that the struct can contain only unmanaged types. If you need to share string data, for instance, you must use a fixed-character array instead. This means manual conversion to and from the string type. Here’s how to do it:
```c#
[StructLayout (LayoutKind.Sequential)] unsafe struct MySharedData
{
...
// Allocate space for 200 chars (i.e., 400 bytes). const int MessageSize = 200;
fixed char message [MessageSize];
// One would most likely put this code into a helper class:
public string Message
{
  get { fixed (char* cp = message) return new string (cp); }
  set
  {
    fixed (char* cp = message)
    {
      int i = 0;
      for (; i < value.Length && i < MessageSize - 1; i++)
        cp [i] = value [i];
      // Add the null terminator
      cp [i] = '\0';
    }
} }
}
```

With the first use of the fixed keyword, we allocate space, inline, for 200 characters in the struct. The same keyword (somewhat confusingly) has a different meaning when used later in the property definition. It instructs the CLR to pin an object so that should it decide to perform a garbage collection inside the fixed block, it will not move the underlying struct about on the memory heap (because its contents are being iterated via direct memory pointers). Looking at our program, you might wonder how MySharedData could ever shift in memory, given that it resides not on the heap but in the unmanaged world, where the garbage collector has no jurisdiction. The compiler doesn’t know this, however, and is concerned that we might use MySharedData in a managed context, so it insists that we add the fixed keyword to make our unsafe code safe in managed contexts. And the compiler does have a point—here’s all it would take to put MySharedData on the heap:
object obj = new MySharedData();
This results in a boxed MySharedData—on the heap and eligible for transit during
garbage collection.
This example illustrates how a string can be represented in a struct mapped to unmanaged memory. For more complex types, you also have the option of using existing serialization code. The one proviso is that the serialized data must never exceed, in length, its allocation of space in the struct; otherwise, the result is an unintended union with subsequent fields.