# COM
The .NET runtime provides special support for COM, enabling COM objects to be used from .NET, and vice versa. COM is available only on Windows.

# The Purpose of COM
COM is an acronym for Component Object Model, a binary standard for interfac‐ ing with libraries, released by Microsoft in 1993. The motivation for inventing COM was to enable components to communicate with each other in a language- independent and version-tolerant manner. Before COM, the approach in Windows was to publish DLLs that declared structures and functions using the C program‐ ming language. Not only is this approach language specific, but it’s also brittle. The specification of a type in such a library is inseparable from its implementation: even updating a structure with a new field means breaking its specification.
The beauty of COM was to separate the specification of a type from its underlying implementation through a construct known as a COM interface. COM also allowed for the calling of methods on stateful objects—rather than being limited to simple procedure calls.

# The Basics of the COM Type System
`The COM type system revolves around interfaces`. A COM interface is rather like a .NET interface, but it’s more prevalent because a COM type exposes its functional‐ ity only through an interface. In the .NET world, for instance, we could declare a type simply, as follows:
    public class Foo
    {
      public string Test() => "Hello, world";
    }
Consumers of that type can use Foo directly. And if we later changed the imple‐ mentation of Test(), calling assemblies would not require recompilation. In this respect, .NET separates interface from implementation—without requiring inter‐ faces. We could even add an overload without breaking callers:
public string Test (string s) => $"Hello, world {s}";
In the COM world, Foo exposes its functionality through an interface to achieve this
same decoupling. So, in Foo’s type library, an interface such as this would exist: public interface IFoo { string Test(); }
(We’ve illustrated this by showing a C# interface—not a COM interface. The princi‐ ple, however, is the same—although the plumbing is different.)
Callers would then interact with IFoo rather than Foo.
When it comes to adding the overloaded version of Test, life is more complicated
with COM than with .NET. First, we would avoid modifying the IFoo interface
because this would break binary compatibility with the previous version (one of the principles of COM is that interfaces, once published, are immutable). Second, COM doesn’t allow method overloading. The solution is to instead have Foo implement a second interface:
    public interface IFoo2 { string Test (string s); }
(Again, we’ve transliterated this into a .NET interface for familiarity.)
Supporting multiple interfaces is of key importance in making COM libraries versionable.


# IUnknown and IDispatch
All COM interfaces are identified with a Globally Unique Identifier (GUID).
The root interface in COM is IUnknown—all COM objects must implement it. This interface has three methods:
• AddRef
• Release
• QueryInterface
AddRef and Release are for lifetime management given that COM uses reference counting rather than automatic garbage collection (COM was designed to work with unmanaged code, where automatic garbage collection isn’t feasible). The Query Interface method returns an object reference that supports that interface, if it can do so.
To enable dynamic programming (e.g., scripting and automation), a COM object can also implement IDispatch. This enables dynamic languages such as VBScript to call COM objects in a late-bound manner—rather like dynamic in C# (although only for simple invocations).

# Calling a COM Component from C#
The CLR’s built-in support for COM means that you don’t work directly with IUnknown and IDispatch. Instead, you work with CLR objects, and the runtime marshals your calls to the COM world via Runtime-Callable Wrappers (RCWs). The runtime also handles lifetime management by calling AddRef and Release (when the .NET object is finalized) and takes care of the primitive type conversions between the two worlds. Type conversion ensures that each side sees, for example, the integer and string types in their familiar forms.
Additionally, there needs to be some way to access RCWs in a statically typed fashion. This is the job of COM interop types. COM interop types are automatically generated proxy types that expose a .NET member for each COM member. The type library importer tool (tlbimp.exe) generates COM interop types from the command
line, based on a COM library that you choose, and compiles them into a COM interop assembly.
If a COM component implements multiple interfaces, the tlbimp.exe tool generates a single type that contains a union of members from all interfaces.
You can create a COM interop assembly in Visual Studio by going to the Add Reference dialog box and choosing a library from the COM tab. For example, if you have Microsoft Excel installed, adding a reference to the Microsoft Excel Object Library allows you to interoperate with Excel’s COM classes. Here’s the C# code to create and show a workbook, and then populate a cell in that workbook:
```c#
using System;
    using Excel = Microsoft.Office.Interop.Excel;
    var excel = new Excel.Application();
    excel.Visible = true;
    Excel.Workbook workBook = excel.Workbooks.Add();
    ((Excel.Range)excel.Cells[1, 1]).Font.FontStyle = "Bold";
    ((Excel.Range)excel.Cells[1, 1]).Value2 = "Hello World";
    workBook.SaveAs (@"d:\temp.xlsx");
It is currently necessary to embed interop t
```

# Optional Parameters and Named Arguments
Because COM APIs don’t support function overloading, it’s very common to have functions with numerous parameters, many of which are optional. For instance, here’s how you might call an Excel workbook’s Save method:
    var missing = System.Reflection.Missing.Value;
    workBook.SaveAs (@"d:\temp.xlsx", missing, missing, missing, missing,
      missing, Excel.XlSaveAsAccessMode.xlNoChange, missing, missing,
      missing, missing, missing);
      The good news is that the C#’s support for optional parameters is COM-aware, so we can just do this:
    workBook.SaveAs (@"d:\temp.xlsx");
(As we stated in Chapter 3, optional parameters are “expanded” by the compiler into the full verbose form.)
Named arguments allow you to specify additional arguments, regardless of their position:
workBook.SaveAs (@"c:\test.xlsx", Password:"foo");

# Implicit ref Parameters
Some COM APIs (Microsoft Word, in particular) expose functions that declare every parameter as pass-by-reference—whether or not the function modifies the parameter value. This is because of the perceived performance gain from not copy‐ ing argument values (the real performance gain is negligible).
Historically, calling such methods from C# has been clumsy because you must specify the ref keyword with every argument, and this prevents the use of optional parameters. For instance, to open a Word document, we used to have to do this:
object filename = "foo.doc";
object notUsed1 = Missing.Value;
object notUsed2 = Missing.Value;
object notUsed3 = Missing.Value;
...
Open (ref filename, ref notUsed1, ref notUsed2, ref notUsed3, ...);
Thanks to implicit ref parameters, you can omit the ref modifier on COM function calls, allowing the use of optional parameters:
    word.Open ("foo.doc");
The caveat is that you will get neither a compile-time nor a runtime error if the COM method you’re calling actually does mutate an argument value.

# Indexers
The ability to omit the ref modifier has another benefit: it makes COM indexers with ref parameters accessible via ordinary C# indexer syntax. This would other‐ wise be forbidden because ref/out parameters are not supported with C# indexers.
You can also call COM properties that accept arguments. In the following example, Foo is a property that accepts an integer argument:
myComObject.Foo [123] = "Hello";
Writing such properties yourself in C# is still prohibited: a type can expose an indexer only on itself (the “default” indexer). Therefore, if you wanted to write code in C# that would make the preceding statement legal, Foo would need to return another type that exposed a (default) indexer.

# Dynamic Binding
There are two ways that dynamic binding can help when calling COM components.
The first way is in allowing access to a COM component without a COM interop type. To do this, call Type.GetTypeFromProgID with the COM component name to obtain a COM instance, and then use dynamic binding to call members from then on. Of course, there’s no IntelliSense, and compile-time checks are impossible:
Type excelAppType = Type.GetTypeFromProgID ("Excel.Application", true); dynamic excel = Activator.CreateInstance (excelAppType);
excel.Visible = true;
dynamic wb = excel.Workbooks.Add();
    excel.Cells [1, 1].Value2 = "foo";
(The same thing can be achieved, much more clumsily, with reflection instead of dynamic binding.)
A variation of this theme is calling a COM component that supports only IDispatch. Such components are quite rare, however.
Dynamic binding can also be useful (to a lesser extent) in dealing with the COM variant type. For reasons due more to poor design than necessity, COM API functions are often peppered with this type, which is roughly equivalent to object in .NET. If you enable “Embed Interop Types” in your project (more on this soon), the runtime will map variant to dynamic, instead of mapping variant to object, avoiding the need for casts. For instance, you could legally do
    excel.Cells [1, 1].Font.FontStyle = "Bold";
instead of:
var range = (Excel.Range) excel.Cells [1, 1]; range.Font.FontStyle = "Bold";
The disadvantage of working in this way is that you lose autocompletion, so you must know that a property called Font happens to exist. For this reason, it’s usually easier to dynamically assign the result to its known interop type:
Excel.Range range = excel.Cells [1, 1]; range.Font.FontStyle = "Bold";
As you can see, this saves only five characters over the old-fashioned approach!
The mapping of variant to dynamic is the default, and is a function of enabling Embed Interop Types on a reference.