# Stream architecture
A backing store is the endpoint that makes input and output useful, such as a file or network connection. Precisely, it is either or both of the following:
• A source from which bytes can be sequentially read
• A destination to which bytes can be sequentially written

A `backing store` is of no use, though, unless exposed to the programmer. 
A `Stream` is the standard .NET class for this purpose; it exposes a standard set of methods for reading, writing, and positioning. 
`Unlike an array, for which all the backing data exists in memory at once, a stream deals with data serially—either one byte at a time or in blocks of a manageable size. Hence, a stream can use a small, fixed amount of memory regardless of the size of its backing store.`

Streams fall into two categories:
`Backing store streams`
These are hardwired to a particular type of backing store, such as FileStream or NetworkStream.
`Decorator streams`
These feed off another stream, transforming the data in some way, such as DeflateStream or CryptoStream.

Decorator streams have the following architectural benefits:
• They liberate backing store streams from needing to implement such features as compression and encryption themselves.
• Streams don’t suffer a change of interface when decorated.
• You connect decorators at runtime.
• You can chain decorators together (e.g., a compressor followed by an encryptor).

An `adapter` wraps a stream, just like a decorator. Unlike a decorator, however, an adapter is not itself a stream; it typically hides the byte-oriented methods completely.

To `summarize`, 
- `backing store streams provide the raw data`,
-  `decorator` streams pro‐ vide transparent binary transformations such as encryption,
-  and `adapters` offer typed methods for dealing in higher-level types such as strings and XML.