# Reading and Writing
A stream can support reading, writing, or both. If CanWrite returns false, the stream is read-only; if CanRead returns false, the stream is write-only.
Read receives a block of data from the stream into an array. It returns the number of bytes received, which is always either less than or equal to the count argument. If it’s less than count, it means that either the end of the stream has been reached or the stream is giving you the data in smaller chunks (as is often the case with network streams). In either case, the balance of bytes in the array will remain unwritten, their previous values preserved.
With Read, you can be certain you’ve reached the end of the stream only when the method returns 0. So, if you have a 1,000-byte stream, the following code might fail to read it all into memory:
```c#
// Assuming s is a stream: 
byte[] data = new byte [1000]; s.Read (data, 0, data.Length);
```
The Read method could read anywhere from 1 to 1,000 bytes, leaving the balance of the stream unread.

Here’s the correct way to read a 1,000-byte stream:
```c#
    byte[] data = new byte [1000];
    // bytesRead will always end up at 1000, unless the stream is
    // itself smaller in length:
    int bytesRead = 0;
    int chunkSize = 1;
    while (bytesRead < data.Length && chunkSize > 0)
      bytesRead +=
        chunkSize = s.Read (data, bytesRead, data.Length - bytesRead);

```
Fortunately, the BinaryReader type provides a simpler way to achieve the same result:
```c#
byte[] data = new BinaryReader (s).ReadBytes (1000);
```
If the stream is less than 1,000 bytes long, the byte array returned reflects the actual stream size. If the stream is seeka‐ ble, you can read its entire contents by replacing 1000 with (int)s.Length.

The `ReadByte` method is simpler: it reads just a single byte, returning −1 to indicate the end of the stream. ReadByte actually returns an int rather than a byte because the latter cannot return −1.
The Write and WriteByte methods send data to the stream. If they are unable to send the specified bytes, an exception is thrown.