# Backing Store Streams
Figure 15-2 shows the key backing store streams provided by .NET. A “null stream” is also available via the Stream’s static Null field. Null streams can be useful when writing unit tests.
```
system.IO : Stream -> MemoryStream,FileStream -> IsolatedStorageFileStream
.net.sockets: NetworkStream
IO.pipes: pipeStream
```

# FileStream
Earlier in this section, we demonstrated the basic use of a FileStream to read and write bytes of data. Let’s now examine the special features of this class.

# Constructing a FileStream
The simplest way to instantiate a FileStream is to use one of the following static façade methods on the File class:
```c#
FileStream fs1 = File.OpenRead  ("readme.bin"); // Read-only
FileStream fs2 = File.OpenWrite ("writeme.tmp"); // Write-only
FileStream fs3 = File.Create    ("readwrite.tmp"); // Read/write
```

In the context of FileStream, `OpenWrite and Create` are two methods for creating or opening a file for writing.

If the file already exists and you call `Create`, any existing content in the file will be truncated (i.e., deleted), and a new file will be created with the specified name. This means that any previous data in the file will be lost, and the file will be empty (or contain only the data that you write to it).

On the other hand, if you call `OpenWrite` on a file that already exists, the existing content in the file will be preserved, and the stream will be positioned at the beginning of the file (i.e., at offset 0). This means that if you write new data to the file, it will be appended to the existing data.

However, it's important to note that if you write fewer bytes than were previously in the file, `OpenWrite` will leave you with a mixture of old and new content. In other words, the old data that wasn't overwritten by the new data will still be present in the file. This can lead to unexpected results if you're not careful, so it's important to be aware of this behavior when using `OpenWrite`.

You can also directly instantiate a FileStream. Its constructors provide access to every feature, allowing you to specify a filename or low-level file handle, file creation and access modes, and options for sharing, buffering, and security. The following opens an existing file for read/write access without overwriting it (the using keyword ensures it is disposed when fs exits scope):
```c#
 using var fs = new FileStream ("readwrite.tmp", FileMode.Open);
```

# Specifying a filename
A filename can be either absolute (e.g., c:\temp\test.txt—or in Unix, /tmp/test.txt) or relative to the current directory (e.g., test.txt or temp\test.txt). You can access or change the current directory via the static Environment.CurrentDirectory property.
When a program starts, the current directory might or might not coincide with that of the program’s executable. For this reason, you should never rely on the current directory for locating additional runtime files packaged along with your executable.
AppDomain.CurrentDomain.BaseDirectory returns the application base directory, which in normal cases is the folder containing the program’s executable. To specify a filename relative to this directory, you can call Path.Combine:
```c#
    string baseFolder = AppDomain.CurrentDomain.BaseDirectory;
    string logoPath = Path.Combine (baseFolder, "logo.jpg");
    Console.WriteLine (File.Exists (logoPath));
```

The following static methods read an entire file into memory in one step:
```c#
• File.ReadAllText (returns a string)
• File.ReadAllLines (returns an array of strings) • File.ReadAllBytes (returns a byte array)
```
The following static methods write an entire file in one step:
```c#
• File.WriteAllText
• File.WriteAllLines
• File.WriteAllBytes
• File.AppendAllText (great for appending to a log file)
```
There’s also a static method called `File.ReadLines: this is like ReadAllLines except that it returns a lazily evaluated IEnumerable<string>. This is more efficient because it doesn’t load the entire file into memory at once. LINQ is ideal for consuming the results; the following calculates the number of lines greater than 80 characters in length`:
```c#
int longLines = File.ReadLines ("filePath") .Count (l => l.Length > 80);
```

# Specifying a FileMode
All of FileStream’s constructors that accept a filename also require a FileMode enum argument. Figure 15-3 shows how to choose a FileMode, and the choices yield results akin to calling a static method on the File class.
['a'](/assets/iamges/filemode.png)

File.Create and FileMode.Create will throw an exception if used on hidden files. To overwrite a hidden file, you must delete and re-create it:
File.Delete ("hidden.txt");
using var file = File.Create ("hidden.txt");

Constructing a FileStream with just a filename and FileMode gives you (with just one exception) a readable/writable stream. You can request a downgrade if you also supply a FileAccess argument:
[Flags]
public enum FileAccess { Read = 1, Write = 2, ReadWrite = 3 }

using var fs = new FileStream ("x.bin", FileMode.Open, FileAccess.Read);
    ...
`FileMode.Append` is the odd one out: with this mode, you get a write-only stream. To append with read-write support, you must instead use FileMode.Open or File Mode.OpenOrCreate and then seek the end of the stream:
```c#
    using var fs = new FileStream ("myFile.bin", FileMode.Open);
    fs.Seek (0, SeekOrigin.End);
    ...
    ```

# Advanced FileStream features
Here are other optional arguments you can include when constructing a File Stream:
• A FileShare enum describing how much access to grant other processes wanting to dip into the same file before you’ve finished (None, Read [default], ReadWrite, or Write).
• The size, in bytes, of the internal buffer (default is currently 4 KB).
• A flag indicating whether to defer to the operating system for asynchronous I/O.
• A FileOptions flags enum for requesting operating system encryption (Encryp ted), automatic deletion upon closure for temporary files (DeleteOnClose), and optimization hints (RandomAccess and SequentialScan). There is also a WriteThrough flag that requests that the OS disable write-behind caching; this is for transactional files or logs. Flags not supported by the underlying OS are silently ignored.

Opening a file with FileShare.ReadWrite allows other processes or users to simul‐ taneously read and write to the same file. To avoid chaos, you can all agree to lock specified portions of the file before reading or writing, using these methods:
```c#
    // Defined on the FileStream class:
    public virtual void Lock   (long position, long length);
    public virtual void Unlock (long position, long length);
```
Lock throws an exception if part or all of the requested file section has already been locked.
